@node sys/types.h
@section @file{sys/types.h}

POSIX specification:@* @url{https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/basedefs/sys_types.h.html}

Gnulib module: sys_types-h
@mindex sys_types-h

Portability problems fixed by Gnulib:
@itemize
@item
The type @code{pid_t} is not defined on some platforms:
MSVC 14.
@item
The type @code{size_t} is not defined in this file on some platforms:
MSVC 14.
@item
The type @code{ssize_t} is not defined on some platforms:
MSVC 14.
@item
The type @code{mode_t} is not defined on some platforms:
MSVC 14.
@item
The type @code{off64_t} is not defined on some platforms:
macOS 14, FreeBSD 10.4, NetBSD 10.0, OpenBSD 7.5, MSVC 14, Cygwin, Haiku, Minix 3.3.
@item
The type @code{blksize_t} is not defined on some platforms:
FreeBSD 5.5, OpenBSD 5.6, HP-UX 11.23, mingw, MSVC 14.
@item
The type @code{blkcnt_t} is not defined on some platforms:
FreeBSD 5.5, OpenBSD 5.6, mingw, MSVC 14.
@item
Some systems leak definitions of @code{major}, @code{minor}, and
@code{makedev} through this header; however, when
@file{sys/sysmacros.h} exists, that file should also be included to
avoid deprecation warnings from the versions in this header:
glibc 2.25.
@end itemize

@xref{Avoiding the year 2038 problem}, for portability issues with
@code{time_t}.

Portability problems not fixed by Gnulib:
@itemize
@item
On some platforms the types @code{blksize_t} and @code{blkcnt_t} are unsigned:
@c https://sourceware.org/PR33355
Android, glibc/alpha.
@item
On some platforms the types @code{blksize_t} and @code{suseconds_t}
are signed integer types that are wider than @code{long}:
glibc x32
@end itemize

@mindex largefile
This module, together with the module @code{largefile}, also defines the type
@code{off_t} to a 64-bit integer type on some platforms:
mingw, MSVC 14.
