\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename gnulib.info
@settitle GNU Gnulib
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c These two require Texinfo 5.0 or later, so we use the older
@c equivalent @set variables supported in 4.11 and hence
@ignore
@codequotebacktick on
@codequoteundirected on
@end ignore
@set txicodequoteundirected
@set txicodequotebacktick
@c Define a new index for the magic constants in regex.texi.
@defcodeindex cn
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex cn cp
@ifclear texi2html
@firstparagraphindent insert
@end ifclear
@comment %**end of header

@comment Defines the UPDATED variable.
@include updated-stamp

@copying
This manual is for GNU Gnulib (updated @value{UPDATED}),
which is a library of common routines intended to be shared at the
source level.

Copyright @copyright{} 2004--2022 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
Documentation License''.
@c A copy of the license is at <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.3.en.html>.
@end copying

@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* Gnulib: (gnulib).             Source files to share among distributions.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title GNU Gnulib
@subtitle updated @value{UPDATED}
@author @email{bug-gnulib@@gnu.org}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top GNU Gnulib

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Brief Overview::
* Philosophy::
* Invoking gnulib-tool::
* Writing modules::
* Extending Gnulib::
* Miscellaneous Notes::
* POSIX Substitutes Library::       Building as a separate substitutes library.
* Header File Substitutes::         Overriding system headers.
* Function Substitutes::            Replacing system functions.
* Legacy Function Substitutes::     Replacing system functions.
* Glibc Header File Substitutes::   Overriding system headers.
* Glibc Function Substitutes::      Replacing system functions.
* Native Windows Support::          Support for the native Windows platforms.
* Multithreading::                  Multiple threads of execution.
* Particular Modules::              Documentation of individual modules.
* Regular expressions::             The regex module.
* Build Infrastructure Modules::    Modules that extend the GNU Build System.
* Build Infrastructure Files::      Non-modules files for the build system.
* Release Management Files::        Non-modules files for preparing releases.
* GNU Free Documentation License::  Copying and sharing this manual.
* Index::
@end menu

@c This is used at the beginning of four chapters.
@macro nosuchmodulenote{thing}
The notation ``Gnulib module: ---'' means that Gnulib does not provide a
module providing a substitute for the \thing\.  When the list
``Portability problems not fixed by Gnulib'' is empty, such a module is
not needed: No portability problems are known.  Otherwise, it indicates
that such a module would be useful but is not available: No one so far
found this \thing\ important enough to contribute a substitute for it.
If you need this particular \thing\, you may write to
@w{@code{<bug-gnulib at gnu dot org>}}.
@end macro


@node Brief Overview
@chapter Brief Overview

Gnulib is a source code library that provides basic functionality to
programs and libraries.  Many software packages make use of Gnulib
to avoid reinventing the portability wheel.

Resources:

@itemize
@item Gnulib is hosted at Savannah:
      @url{https://savannah.gnu.org/projects/gnulib}.  Get the sources
      through Git from there.
@item The Gnulib home page:
      @url{https://www.gnu.org/software/gnulib/}.
@end itemize

@include gnulib-readme.texi

@node Philosophy
@chapter Philosophy

Gnulib's design and development philosophy is organized around steady,
collaborative, and open development of reusable modules that are
suitable for a reasonably wide variety of platforms.

@menu
* Benefits::
* Library vs Reusable Code::
* Portability and Application Code::
* Target Platforms::
* Modules::
* Various Kinds of Modules::
* Collaborative Development::
* Copyright::
* Steady Development::
* Openness::
@end menu

@include gnulib-intro.texi


@include gnulib-tool.texi


@node Writing modules
@chapter Writing modules

This chapter explains how to write modules of your own, either to
extend Gnulib for your own package (@pxref{Extending Gnulib}), or for
inclusion in gnulib proper.

The guidelines in this chapter do not necessarily need to be followed for
using @code{gnulib-tool}.  They merely represent a set of good practices.
Following them will result in a good structure of your modules and in
consistency with gnulib.

@menu
* Source code files::
* Header files::
* Implementation files::
* Specification::
* Module description::
* Autoconf macros::
* Using @code{AC_LIBOBJ}::
* Unit test modules::
* Incompatible changes::
@end menu


@node Source code files
@section Source code files

Every API (C functions or variables) provided should be declared in a header
file (.h file) and implemented in one or more implementation files (.c files).
The separation has the effect that users of your module need to read only
the contents of the .h file and the module description in order to understand
what the module is about and how to use it---not the entire implementation.
Furthermore, users of your module don't need to repeat the declarations of
the functions in their code, and are likely to receive notification through
compiler errors if you make incompatible changes to the API (like, adding a
parameter or changing the return type of a function).


@node Header files
@section Header files

The .h file should declare the C functions and variables that the module
provides.

The .h file should be stand-alone.  That is, it does not require other .h files
to be included before.  Rather, it includes all necessary .h files by itself.

@cindex double inclusion of header files
@cindex header file include protection
It is a tradition to use CPP tricks to avoid parsing the same header
file more than once, which might cause warnings.  The trick is to wrap
the content of the header file (say, @file{foo.h}) in a block, as in:

@example
#ifndef FOO_H
# define FOO_H
...
body of header file goes here
...
#endif /* FOO_H */
@end example

Whether to use @code{FOO_H} or @code{_FOO_H} is a matter of taste and
style.  The C99 and C11 standards reserve all identifiers that begin with an
underscore and either an uppercase letter or another underscore, for
any use.  Thus, in theory, an application might not safely assume that
@code{_FOO_H} has not already been defined by a library.  On the other
hand, using @code{FOO_H} will likely lead the higher risk of
collisions with other symbols (e.g., @code{KEY_H}, @code{XK_H}, @code{BPF_H},
which are CPP macro constants, or @code{COFF_LONG_H}, which is a CPP
macro function).  Your preference may depend on whether you consider
the header file under discussion as part of the application (which has
its own namespace for CPP symbols) or a supporting library (that
shouldn't interfere with the application's CPP symbol namespace).

@cindex C++ header files
@cindex Header files and C++
Adapting C header files for use in C++ applications can use another
CPP trick, as in:

@example
# ifdef __cplusplus
extern "C"
@{
# endif
...
body of header file goes here
...
# ifdef __cplusplus
@}
# endif
@end example

The idea here is that @code{__cplusplus} is defined only by C++
implementations, which will wrap the header file in an @samp{extern "C"}
block.  Again, whether to use this trick is a matter of taste and
style.  While the above can be seen as harmless, it could be argued
that the header file is written in C, and any C++ application using it
should explicitly use the @samp{extern "C"} block itself.  Your
preference might depend on whether you consider the API exported by
your header file as something available for C programs only, or for C
and C++ programs alike.

Note that putting a @code{#include} in an @code{extern "C" @{ ... @}}
block yields a syntax error in C++ mode on some platforms (e.g., glibc
systems with g++ v3.3 to v4.2, AIX, IRIX).  For this reason, it
is recommended to place the @code{#include} before the @code{extern
"C"} block.

@node Implementation files
@section Implementation files

The .c file or files implement the functions and variables declared in the
.h file.

@subheading Include ordering

Every implementation file must start with @samp{#include <config.h>}.
This is necessary for activating the preprocessor macros that are defined
on behalf of the Autoconf macros.  Some of these preprocessor macros,
such as @code{_GNU_SOURCE}, would have no effect if defined after a system
header file has already been included.

Then comes the @samp{#include "..."} specifying the header file that is
being implemented.  Putting this right after @samp{#include <config.h>}
has the effect that it verifies that the header file is self-contained.

Then come the system and application headers. It is customary to put all the
system headers before all application headers, so as to minimize the risk
that a preprocessor macro defined in an application header confuses the system
headers on some platforms.

In summary:

@itemize
@item
First comes #include <config.h>.
@item
Second comes the #include "..." specifying the module being implemented.
@item
Then come all the #include <...> of system or system-replacement headers,
in arbitrary order.
@item
Then come all the #include "..." of gnulib and application headers, in
arbitrary order.
@end itemize


@node Specification
@section Specification

The specification of a function should answer at least the following
questions:
@itemize
@item
What is the purpose of the function?
@item
What are the arguments?
@item
What is the return value?
@item
What happens in case of failure? (Exit? A specific return value? Errno set?)
@item
Memory allocation policy: If pointers to memory are returned, are they freshly
allocated and supposed to be freed by the caller?
@end itemize

@cindex specification
@cindex comments describing functions
@cindex describing functions, locating
Where to put the specification describing exported functions? Three practices
are used in gnulib:

@itemize
@item
The specification can be as comments in the header file, just above the
function declaration.
@item
The specification can be as comments in the implementation file, just above
the function definition.
@item
The specification can be in texinfo format, so that it gets included in the
gnulib manual.
@end itemize

In any case, the specification should appear in just one place, unless you can
ensure that the multiple copies will always remain identical.

The advantage of putting it in the header file is that the user only has to
read the include file normally never needs to peek into the implementation
file(s).

The advantage of putting it in the implementation file is that when reviewing
or changing the implementation, you have both elements side by side.

The advantage of texinfo formatted documentation is that it is easily
published in HTML or Info format.

Currently (as of 2020), 70% of gnulib uses the first practice, 25% of
gnulib uses the second practice, and a small minority uses the texinfo
practice.


@node Module description
@section Module description

For the module description, you can start from an existing module's
description, or from a blank one: @file{module/TEMPLATE} for a normal module,
or @file{module/TEMPLATE-TESTS} for a unit test module.  Some more fields
are possible but rarely used.  Use @file{module/TEMPLATE-EXTENDED} if you
want to use one of them.

Module descriptions have the following fields.  Absent fields are equivalent
to fields with empty contents.

@table @asis
@item Description
This field should contain a concise description of the module's functionality.
One sentence is enough.  For example, if it defines a single function
@samp{frob}, the description can be @samp{frob() function: frobnication.}
Gnulib's documentation generator will automatically convert the first part
to a hyperlink when it has this form.

@item Status
This field is either empty/absent, or contains the word @samp{obsolete}.  In
the latter case, @command{gnulib-tool} will, unless the option
@code{--with-obsolete} is given, omit it when it used as a dependency.  It is
good practice to also notify the user about an obsolete module.  This is done
by putting into the @samp{Notice} section (see below) text like
@samp{This module is obsolete.}

@item Notice
This field contains text that @command{gnulib-tool} will show to the user
when the module is used.  This can be a status indicator like
@samp{This module is obsolete.} or additional advice.  Do not abuse this
field.

@item Applicability
This field is either empty/absent, or contains the word @samp{all}.  It
describes to which @code{Makefile.am} the module is applied.  By default,
a normal module is applied to @code{@var{source_base}/Makefile.am}
(normally @code{lib/Makefile.am}), whereas a module ending in @code{-tests}
is applied to @code{@var{tests_base}/Makefile.am} (normally
@code{tests/Makefile.am}).  If this field is @samp{all}, it is applied to
both @code{Makefile.am}s.  This is useful for modules which provide
Makefile.am macros rather than compiled source code.

@item Files
This field contains a newline separated list of the files that are part of
the module.  @code{gnulib-tool} copies these files into the package that
uses the module.

This list is typically ordered by importance: First comes the header file,
then the implementation files, then other files.

It is possible to have the same file mentioned in multiple modules.  That is,
if the maintainers of that module agree on the purpose and future of said
file.

@item Depends-on
This field contains a newline separated list of the modules that are required
for the proper working of this module.  @code{gnulib-tool} includes each
required module automatically, unless it is specified with option
@code{--avoid} or it is marked as obsolete and the option
@code{--with-obsolete} is not given.

A test modules @code{foo-tests} implicitly depends on the corresponding non-test
module @code{foo}.  @code{foo} implicitly depends on @code{foo-tests} if the
latter exists and if the option @code{--with-tests} has been given.

Tests modules can depend on non-tests modules.  Non-tests modules should not
depend on tests modules. (Recall that tests modules are built in a separate
directory.)

Each listed required module may be declared a conditional dependency.  This
is indicated by placing the condition for the dependency on the same line,
enclosed in brackets, after the name of the required module.  The condition
is a shell expression that is run after the module's @code{configure.ac}
statements.  For example:
@smallexample
strtoull   [test $ac_cv_func_strtoumax = no]
@end smallexample

Lines starting with @code{#} are recognized as comments and are ignored.

@item configure.ac-early
This field contains @file{configure.ac} stuff (Autoconf macro invocations and
shell statements) that are logically placed early in the @file{configure.ac}
file: right after the @code{AC_PROG_CC} invocation.  This section is adequate
for statements that modify @code{CPPFLAGS}, as these can affect the results of
other Autoconf macros.

@item configure.ac
This field contains @file{configure.ac} stuff (Autoconf macro invocations and
shell statements).

It is forbidden to add items to the @code{CPPFLAGS} variable here, other than
temporarily, as these could affect the results of other Autoconf macros.

We avoid adding items to the @code{LIBS} variable, other than temporarily.
Instead, the module can export an Autoconf-substituted variable that contains
link options.  The user of the module can then decide to which executables
to apply which link options.  Recall that a package can build executables of
different kinds and purposes; having all executables link against all
libraries is inappropriate.

If the statements in this section grow larger than a couple of lines, we
recommend moving them to a @code{.m4} file of their own.

@item Makefile.am
This field contains @code{Makefile.am} statements.  Variables like
@code{lib_SOURCES} are transformed to match the name of the library
being built in that directory.  For example, @code{lib_SOURCES} may become
@code{libgnu_a_SOURCES} (for a plain library) or @code{libgnu_la_SOURCES}
(for a libtool library).  Therefore, the normal way of having an
implementation file @code{lib/foo.c} compiled unconditionally is to write
@smallexample
lib_SOURCES += foo.c
@end smallexample

@item Include
This field contains the preprocessor statements that users of the module
need to add to their source code files.  Typically it's a single include
statement.  A shorthand is allowed: You don't need to write the word
``#include'', just the name of the include file in the way it will appear
in an include statement.  Example:
@smallexample
"foo.h"
@end smallexample

@item Link
This field contains the set of libraries that are needed when linking
libraries or executables that use this module.  Often this will be
written as a reference to a Makefile variable.  Please write them
one per line, so that @command{gnulib-tool} can remove duplicates
when presenting a summary to the user.
Example:
@smallexample
$(POW_LIBM)
$(LTLIBICONV) when linking with libtool, $(LIBICONV) otherwise
@end smallexample
When this field is omitted, it defaults to the union of the @code{Link}
field of the dependencies.

@item License
This field specifies the license that governs the source code parts of
this module.  See @ref{Copyright} for details.  Be sure to place, in every
source code file, a copyright notice and the appropriate license notice,
taken from the @file{etc/license-notices/} directory.

@item Maintainer
This field specifies the persons who have a definitive say about proposed
changes to this module.  You don't need to mention email addresses here:
they can be inferred from the @code{ChangeLog} file.

Please put at least one person here.  We don't like unmaintained modules.
@end table


@node Autoconf macros
@section Autoconf macros

For a module @code{foo}, an Autoconf macro file @file{m4/foo.m4} is typically
created when the Autoconf macro invocations for the module are longer than
one or two lines.

The name of the main entry point into this Autoconf macro file is typically
@code{gl_FOO}.  For modules outside Gnulib that are not likely to be moved
into Gnulib, please use a prefix specific to your package: @code{gt_} for
GNU gettext, @code{cu_} for GNU coreutils, etc.

For modules that define a function @code{foo}, the entry point is called
@code{gl_FUNC_FOO} instead of @code{gl_FOO}.  For modules that provide a
header file with multiple functions, say @code{foo.h}, the entry point is
called @code{gl_FOO_H} or @code{gl_HEADER_FOO_H}.  This convention is useful
because sometimes a header and a function name coincide (for example,
@code{fcntl} and @code{fcntl.h}).

For modules that provide a replacement, it is useful to split the Autoconf
macro into two macro definitions: one that detects whether the replacement
is needed and requests the replacement by setting a @code{HAVE_FOO}
variable to 0 or a @code{REPLACE_FOO} variable to 1 (this is the
entry point, say @code{gl_FUNC_FOO}), and one that arranges for the macros
needed by the replacement code @code{lib/foo.c} (typically called
@code{gl_PREREQ_FOO}).  The reason of this separation is
@enumerate
@item
to make it easy to update the Autoconf macros when you have modified the
source code file: after changing @code{lib/foo.c}, all you have to review
is the @code{Depends-on} section of the module description and the
@code{gl_PREREQ_FOO} macro in the Autoconf macro file.
@item
The Autoconf macros are often large enough that splitting them eases
maintenance.
@end enumerate


@node Using @code{AC_LIBOBJ}
@section Making proper use of @code{AC_LIBOBJ}

Source files that provide a replacement should be only compiled on the
platforms that need this replacement.  While it is actually possible
to compile a @code{.c} file whose contents is entirely @code{#ifdef}'ed
out on the platforms that don't need the replacement, this practice is
discouraged because
@itemize @bullet
@item
It makes the build time longer than needed, by invoking the compiler for
nothing.
@item
It produces a @code{.o} file that suggests that a replacement was needed.
@item
Empty object files produce a linker warning on some platforms: MSVC.
@end itemize

The typical idiom for invoking @code{AC_LIBOBJ} is thus the following,
in the module description:

@smallexample
if test $HAVE_FOO = 0 || test $REPLACE_FOO = 1; then
  AC_LIBOBJ([foo])
  gl_PREREQ_FOO
fi
@end smallexample

Important: Do not place @code{AC_LIBOBJ} invocations in the Autoconf
macros in the @code{m4/} directory.  The purpose of the Autoconf macros
is to determine what features or bugs the platform has, and to make
decisions about which replacements are needed.  The purpose of the
@code{configure.ac} and @code{Makefile.am} sections of the module
descriptions is to arrange for the replacements to be compiled.
@strong{Source file names do not belong in the @code{m4/} directory.}

When an @code{AC_LIBOBJ} invocation is unconditional, it is simpler
to just have the source file compiled through an Automake variable
augmentation: In the @code{Makefile.am} section write

@smallexample
lib_SOURCES += foo.c
@end smallexample

When a module description contains an @code{AC_LIBOBJ([foo])}
invocation, you @strong{must} list the source file @code{lib/foo.c}
in the @code{Files} section.  This is needed even if the module
depends on another module that already lists @code{lib/foo.c} in its
@code{Files} section --- because your module might be used among
the test modules (in the directory specified through @samp{--tests-base})
and the other module among the main modules (in the directory specified
through @samp{--source-base}), and in this situation, the
@code{AC_LIBOBJ([foo])} of your module can only be satisfied by having
@code{foo.c} be present in the tests source directory as well.

@node Unit test modules
@section Unit test modules

A unit test that is a simple C program usually has a module description as
simple as this:

@smallexample
Files:
tests/test-foo.c
tests/macros.h

Depends-on:

configure.ac:

Makefile.am:
TESTS += test-foo
check_PROGRAMS += test-foo
@end smallexample

The test program @file{tests/test-foo.c} often has the following structure:

@itemize
@item
First comes the obligatory @samp{#include <config.h>}.

@item
Second comes the include of the header file that declares the API being tested.
Including it here verifies that said header file is self-contained.

@item
Then come other includes.  In particular, the file @file{macros.h} is often
used here.  It contains a convenient @code{ASSERT} macro.
@end itemize

The body of the test, then, contains many @code{ASSERT} invocations.  When
a test fails, the @code{ASSERT} macro prints the line number of the failing
statement, thus giving you, the developer, an idea of which part of the test
failed, even when you don't have access to the machine where the test failed
and the reporting user cannot run a debugger.

Sometimes it is convenient to write part of the test as a shell script.
(For example, in areas related to process control or interprocess
communication, or when different locales should be tried.) In these cases,
the typical module description is like this:

@smallexample
Files:
tests/test-foo.sh
tests/test-foo.c
tests/macros.h

Depends-on:

configure.ac:

Makefile.am:
TESTS += test-foo.sh
TESTS_ENVIRONMENT += FOO_BAR='@@FOO_BAR@@'
check_PROGRAMS += test-foo
@end smallexample

Here, the @code{TESTS_ENVIRONMENT} variable can be used to pass values
determined by @code{configure} or by the @code{Makefile} to the shell
script, as environment variables.  The Autoconf values @code{EXEEXT}
and @code{srcdir} are already provided as environment variables,
through an initial value of @code{TESTS_ENVIRONMENT} that
@code{gnulib-tool} puts in place.

Regardless of the specific form of the unit test, the following guidelines
should be respected:

@itemize
@item
A test indicates success by exiting with exit code 0.  It should normally
not produce output in this case.  (Output to temporary files that are
cleaned up at the end of the test are possible, of course.)
@item
A test indicates failure by exiting with an exit code different from 0 and 77,
typically 1.  It is useful to print a message about the failure in this case.
The @code{ASSERT} macro already does so.
@item
A test indicates "skip", that is, that most of its interesting functionality
could not be performed, through a return code of 77.  A test should also
print a message to stdout or stderr about the reason for skipping.
For example:
@smallexample
  fputs ("Skipping test: multithreading not enabled\n", stderr);
  return 77;
@end smallexample
Such a message helps detecting bugs in the autoconf macros: A simple message
@samp{SKIP: test-foo} does not sufficiently catch the attention of the user.
@end itemize


@node Incompatible changes
@section Incompatible changes

Incompatible changes to Gnulib modules should be mentioned in Gnulib's
@file{NEWS} file.  Incompatible changes here mean that existing source code
may not compile or work any more.

We don't mean changes in the binary interface (ABI), since
@enumerate
@item
Gnulib code is used in source-code form.
@item
The user who distributes libraries that contain Gnulib code is supposed to
bump the version number in the way described in the Libtool documentation
before every release.
@end enumerate


@node Extending Gnulib
@chapter Extending Gnulib

Gnulib modules are intended to be suitable for widespread use.  Most
problems with Gnulib can and should be fixed in a generic way, so that
all of Gnulib's users can benefit from the change.  But occasionally a
problem arises that is difficult or undesirable to fix generically, or
a project that uses Gnulib may need to work around an issue before the
Gnulib maintainers commit a final fix.  Maintainers may also want to
add their own pools of modules to projects as Gnulib ``staging
areas.''

The obvious way to make local changes to Gnulib modules is to use
@command{gnulib-tool} to check out pristine modules, then to modify
the results in-place.  This works well enough for short-lived
experiments.  It is harder to keep modified versions of Gnulib modules
for a long time, even though Git (or another distributed version
control systems) can help out a lot with this during the development
process.

Git, however, doesn't address the distribution issue.  When a package
``foobar'' needs a modified version of, say, @file{stdint.in.h}, it
either has to put a comment into @file{foobar/autogen.sh} saying
``Attention! This doesn't work with a pristine Gnulib, you need this
and that patch after checking out Gnulib,'' or it has to use the
@samp{--avoid=stdint} option and provide the modified @code{stdint}
module in a different directory.

The @option{--local-dir} option to @command{gnulib-tool} solves this
problem.  It allows the package to override or augment Gnulib.  This
means:

@itemize @bullet
@item
You can store files that are to override Gnulib files or modules.

@item
You can store context diffs to be applied to Gnulib files.

@item
You can add modules of your own, that are not (yet) in Gnulib.

@item
You can also add unstructured amounts of code to the library, by
grouping the non-Gnulib files of the library in a single kitchen-sink
``module.''  (This kind of kitchen-sink module is not needed when you
use the @command{gnulib-tool} option @option{--makefile-name}.)
@end itemize

In a release tarball, you can distribute the contents of this
@option{--local-dir} directory that will be combinable with newer
versions of Gnulib, barring incompatible changes to Gnulib.

If the @option{--local-dir=@var{directory}} option is specified, then
@command{gnulib-tool} looks in @file{@var{directory}} whenever it
reads a file from the Gnulib directory.  Suppose @command{gnulib-tool}
is looking for @var{file}.  Then:

@itemize @bullet
@item
If @file{@var{directory}/@var{file}} exists, then @command{gnulib-tool} uses
it instead of the file included in Gnulib.

@item
Otherwise, if @file{@var{directory}/@var{file}.diff} exists, then
@command{gnulib-tool} uses the file from Gnulib after applying the diff
using the @command{patch} program.

@item
Otherwise, @command{gnulib-tool} uses the file included in Gnulib.
@end itemize

You can specify the @option{--local-dir} multiple times.  In this case,
the first specified directory has the highest precedence.  That is, a
@file{@var{file}} found in one directory will shadow any @file{@var{file}}
and @file{@var{file}.diff} in the later directories and in the Gnulib
directory.  And a file @file{@var{file}.diff} found in one directory will
be applied on top of the combination of @file{@var{file}} and
@file{@var{file}.diff} files found in the later directories and in the
Gnulib directory.

Please make wise use of this option.  It also allows you to easily
hold back modifications you make to Gnulib macros in cases it may be
better to share them.


@node Miscellaneous Notes
@chapter Miscellaneous Notes

@menu
* Out of memory handling::
* Obsolete modules::
* Extra tests modules::
* Modules that modify the way other modules work::
* A C++ namespace for gnulib::      A different way of using Gnulib in C++
* License Texinfo sources::
* Building gnulib::
@end menu

@include out-of-memory.texi

@include obsolete.texi

@include extra-tests.texi

@include transversal.texi

@include namespace.texi

@include licenses-texi.texi

@include build-automation.texi


@node POSIX Substitutes Library
@chapter Building the ISO C and POSIX Substitutes

This section shows a radically different way to use Gnulib.

You can extract the ISO C / POSIX substitutes part of gnulib by running
the command
@smallexample
gnulib-tool --create-testdir --source-base=lib \
            --dir=/tmp/posixlib `posix-modules`
@end smallexample

@noindent
The command @samp{posix-modules} is found in the same directory as
@code{gnulib-tool}.

The resulting directory can be built on a particular platform,
independently of the program being ported.  Then you can configure and
build any program, by setting @code{CPPFLAGS} and @code{LDFLAGS} at
configure time accordingly: set @code{CPPFLAGS="-I.../posixlib/lib"}, plus
any essential type definitions and flags that you find in
@code{.../posixlib/config.h}, and set
@code{LDFLAGS=".../posixlib/lib/libgnu.a"}.

This way of using Gnulib is useful when you don't want to modify the program's
source code, or when the program uses a mix between C and C++ sources
(requiring separate builds of the @code{posixlib} for the C compiler and
for the C++ compiler).

@node Header File Substitutes
@chapter ISO C and POSIX Header File Substitutes

This chapter describes which header files specified by ISO C or POSIX are
substituted by Gnulib, which portability pitfalls are fixed by Gnulib, and
which (known) portability problems are not worked around by Gnulib.

@nosuchmodulenote header file

@menu
* aio.h::
* arpa/inet.h::
* assert.h::
* complex.h::
* cpio.h::
* ctype.h::
* dirent.h::
* dlfcn.h::
* errno.h::
* fcntl.h::
* fenv.h::
* float.h::
* fmtmsg.h::
* fnmatch.h::
* ftw.h::
* glob.h::
* grp.h::
* iconv.h::
* inttypes.h::
* iso646.h::
* langinfo.h::
* libgen.h::
* limits.h::
* locale.h::
* math.h::
* monetary.h::
* mqueue.h::
* ndbm.h::
* net/if.h::
* netdb.h::
* netinet/in.h::
* netinet/tcp.h::
* nl_types.h::
* poll.h::
* pthread.h::
* pwd.h::
* regex.h::
* sched.h::
* search.h::
* semaphore.h::
* setjmp.h::
* signal.h::
* spawn.h::
* stdalign.h::
* stdarg.h::
* stdbool.h::
* stdckdint.h::
* stddef.h::
* stdint.h::
* stdio.h::
* stdlib.h::
* stdnoreturn.h::
* string.h::
* strings.h::
* stropts.h::
* sys/ipc.h::
* sys/mman.h::
* sys/msg.h::
* sys/resource.h::
* sys/select.h::
* sys/sem.h::
* sys/shm.h::
* sys/socket.h::
* sys/stat.h::
* sys/statvfs.h::
* sys/time.h::
* sys/timeb.h::
* sys/times.h::
* sys/types.h::
* sys/uio.h::
* sys/un.h::
* sys/utsname.h::
* sys/wait.h::
* syslog.h::
* tar.h::
* termios.h::
* tgmath.h::
* threads.h::
* time.h::
* trace.h::
* uchar.h::
* ucontext.h::
* ulimit.h::
* unistd.h::
* utime.h::
* utmpx.h::
* wchar.h::
* wctype.h::
* wordexp.h::
@end menu

@include posix-headers/aio.texi
@include posix-headers/arpa_inet.texi
@include posix-headers/assert.texi
@include posix-headers/complex.texi
@include posix-headers/cpio.texi
@include posix-headers/ctype.texi
@include posix-headers/dirent.texi
@include posix-headers/dlfcn.texi
@include posix-headers/errno.texi
@include posix-headers/fcntl.texi
@include posix-headers/fenv.texi
@include posix-headers/float.texi
@include posix-headers/fmtmsg.texi
@include posix-headers/fnmatch.texi
@include posix-headers/ftw.texi
@include posix-headers/glob.texi
@include posix-headers/grp.texi
@include posix-headers/iconv.texi
@include posix-headers/inttypes.texi
@include posix-headers/iso646.texi
@include posix-headers/langinfo.texi
@include posix-headers/libgen.texi
@include posix-headers/limits.texi
@include posix-headers/locale.texi
@include posix-headers/math.texi
@include posix-headers/monetary.texi
@include posix-headers/mqueue.texi
@include posix-headers/ndbm.texi
@include posix-headers/net_if.texi
@include posix-headers/netdb.texi
@include posix-headers/netinet_in.texi
@include posix-headers/netinet_tcp.texi
@include posix-headers/nl_types.texi
@include posix-headers/poll.texi
@include posix-headers/pthread.texi
@include posix-headers/pwd.texi
@include posix-headers/regex.texi
@include posix-headers/sched.texi
@include posix-headers/search.texi
@include posix-headers/semaphore.texi
@include posix-headers/setjmp.texi
@include posix-headers/signal.texi
@include posix-headers/spawn.texi
@include posix-headers/stdalign.texi
@include posix-headers/stdarg.texi
@include posix-headers/stdbool.texi
@include posix-headers/stdckdint.texi
@include posix-headers/stddef.texi
@include posix-headers/stdint.texi
@include posix-headers/stdio.texi
@include posix-headers/stdlib.texi
@include posix-headers/stdnoreturn.texi
@include posix-headers/string.texi
@include posix-headers/strings.texi
@include posix-headers/stropts.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_ipc.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_mman.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_msg.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_resource.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_select.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_sem.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_shm.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_socket.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_stat.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_statvfs.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_time.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_timeb.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_times.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_types.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_uio.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_un.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_utsname.texi
@include posix-headers/sys_wait.texi
@include posix-headers/syslog.texi
@include posix-headers/tar.texi
@include posix-headers/termios.texi
@include posix-headers/tgmath.texi
@include posix-headers/threads.texi
@include posix-headers/time.texi
@include posix-headers/trace.texi
@include posix-headers/uchar.texi
@include posix-headers/ucontext.texi
@include posix-headers/ulimit.texi
@include posix-headers/unistd.texi
@include posix-headers/utime.texi
@include posix-headers/utmpx.texi
@include posix-headers/wchar.texi
@include posix-headers/wctype.texi
@include posix-headers/wordexp.texi

@node Function Substitutes
@chapter ISO C and POSIX Function Substitutes

This chapter describes which functions and function-like macros specified by
ISO C (including ISO TS 18661-1) or POSIX are substituted by Gnulib, which
portability pitfalls are fixed by Gnulib, and which (known) portability
problems are not worked around by Gnulib.

@nosuchmodulenote function

@menu
* FD_CLR::
* FD_ISSET::
* FD_SET::
* FD_ZERO::
* _Exit::
* _exit::
* _longjmp::
* _setjmp::
* _tolower::
* _toupper::
* a64l::
* abort::
* abs::
* accept::
* access::
* acos::
* acosf::
* acosh::
* acoshf::
* acoshl::
* acosl::
* aio_cancel::
* aio_error::
* aio_fsync::
* aio_read::
* aio_return::
* aio_suspend::
* aio_write::
* alarm::
* aligned_alloc::
* alphasort::
* asctime::
* asctime_r::
* asin::
* asinf::
* asinh::
* asinhf::
* asinhl::
* asinl::
* assert::
* atan::
* atan2::
* atan2f::
* atan2l::
* atanf::
* atanh::
* atanhf::
* atanhl::
* atanl::
* atexit::
* atof::
* atoi::
* atol::
* atoll::
* basename::
* bind::
* bsearch::
* btowc::
* c16rtomb::
* c32rtomb::
* cabs::
* cabsf::
* cabsl::
* cacos::
* cacosf::
* cacosh::
* cacoshf::
* cacoshl::
* cacosl::
* calloc::
* call_once::
* canonicalize::
* canonicalizef::
* canonicalizel::
* carg::
* cargf::
* cargl::
* casin::
* casinf::
* casinh::
* casinhf::
* casinhl::
* casinl::
* catan::
* catanf::
* catanh::
* catanhf::
* catanhl::
* catanl::
* catclose::
* catgets::
* catopen::
* cbrt::
* cbrtf::
* cbrtl::
* ccos::
* ccosf::
* ccosh::
* ccoshf::
* ccoshl::
* ccosl::
* ceil::
* ceilf::
* ceill::
* cexp::
* cexpf::
* cexpl::
* cfgetispeed::
* cfgetospeed::
* cfsetispeed::
* cfsetospeed::
* chdir::
* chmod::
* chown::
* cimag::
* cimagf::
* cimagl::
* clearerr::
* clock::
* clock_getcpuclockid::
* clock_getres::
* clock_gettime::
* clock_nanosleep::
* clock_settime::
* clog::
* clogf::
* clogl::
* close::
* closedir::
* closelog::
* cnd_broadcast::
* cnd_destroy::
* cnd_init::
* cnd_signal::
* cnd_timedwait::
* cnd_wait::
* confstr::
* conj::
* conjf::
* conjl::
* connect::
* copysign::
* copysignf::
* copysignl::
* cos::
* cosf::
* cosh::
* coshf::
* coshl::
* cosl::
* cpow::
* cpowf::
* cpowl::
* cproj::
* cprojf::
* cprojl::
* creal::
* crealf::
* creall::
* creat::
* crypt::
* csin::
* csinf::
* csinh::
* csinhf::
* csinhl::
* csinl::
* csqrt::
* csqrtf::
* csqrtl::
* ctan::
* ctanf::
* ctanh::
* ctanhf::
* ctanhl::
* ctanl::
* ctermid::
* ctime::
* ctime_r::
* daddl::
* daylight::
* dbm_clearerr::
* dbm_close::
* dbm_delete::
* dbm_error::
* dbm_fetch::
* dbm_firstkey::
* dbm_nextkey::
* dbm_open::
* dbm_store::
* ddivl::
* difftime::
* dirfd::
* dirname::
* div::
* dlclose::
* dlerror::
* dlopen::
* dlsym::
* dmull::
* dprintf::
* drand48::
* dsubl::
* dup::
* dup2::
* duplocale::
* encrypt::
* endgrent::
* endhostent::
* endnetent::
* endprotoent::
* endpwent::
* endservent::
* endutxent::
* environ::
* erand48::
* erf::
* erfc::
* erfcf::
* erfcl::
* erff::
* erfl::
* errno::
* execl::
* execle::
* execlp::
* execv::
* execve::
* execvp::
* exit::
* exp::
* exp2::
* exp2f::
* exp2l::
* expf::
* expl::
* expm1::
* expm1f::
* expm1l::
* fabs::
* fabsf::
* fabsl::
* faccessat::
* fadd::
* faddl::
* fattach::
* fchdir::
* fchmod::
* fchmodat::
* fchown::
* fchownat::
* fclose::
* fcntl::
* fdatasync::
* fdetach::
* fdim::
* fdimf::
* fdiml::
* fdiv::
* fdivl::
* fdopen::
* fdopendir::
* feclearexcept::
* fegetenv::
* fegetexceptflag::
* fegetmode::
* fegetround::
* feholdexcept::
* feof::
* feraiseexcept::
* ferror::
* fesetenv::
* fesetexcept::
* fesetexceptflag::
* fesetmode::
* fesetround::
* fetestexcept::
* fetestexceptflag::
* feupdateenv::
* fexecve::
* fflush::
* ffs::
* fgetc::
* fgetpos::
* fgets::
* fgetwc::
* fgetws::
* fileno::
* flockfile::
* floor::
* floorf::
* floorl::
* fma::
* fmaf::
* fmal::
* fmax::
* fmaxf::
* fmaxl::
* fmaxmag::
* fmaxmagf::
* fmaxmagl::
* fmemopen::
* fmin::
* fminf::
* fminl::
* fminmag::
* fminmagf::
* fminmagl::
* fmod::
* fmodf::
* fmodl::
* fmtmsg::
* fmul::
* fmull::
* fnmatch::
* fopen::
* fork::
* fpathconf::
* fpclassify::
* fprintf::
* fputc::
* fputs::
* fputwc::
* fputws::
* fread::
* free::
* freeaddrinfo::
* freelocale::
* freopen::
* frexp::
* frexpf::
* frexpl::
* fromfp::
* fromfpf::
* fromfpl::
* fromfpx::
* fromfpxf::
* fromfpxl::
* fscanf::
* fseek::
* fseeko::
* fsetpos::
* fstat::
* fstatat::
* fstatvfs::
* fsub::
* fsubl::
* fsync::
* ftell::
* ftello::
* ftok::
* ftruncate::
* ftrylockfile::
* ftw::
* funlockfile::
* futimens::
* fwide::
* fwprintf::
* fwrite::
* fwscanf::
* gai_strerror::
* getaddrinfo::
* getc::
* getc_unlocked::
* getchar::
* getchar_unlocked::
* getcwd::
* getdate::
* getdate_err::
* getdelim::
* getegid::
* getenv::
* geteuid::
* getgid::
* getgrent::
* getgrgid::
* getgrgid_r::
* getgrnam::
* getgrnam_r::
* getgroups::
* gethostent::
* gethostid::
* gethostname::
* getitimer::
* getline::
* getlogin::
* getlogin_r::
* getmsg::
* getnameinfo::
* getnetbyaddr::
* getnetbyname::
* getnetent::
* getopt::
* getpayload::
* getpayloadf::
* getpayloadl::
* getpeername::
* getpgid::
* getpgrp::
* getpid::
* getpmsg::
* getppid::
* getpriority::
* getprotobyname::
* getprotobynumber::
* getprotoent::
* getpwent::
* getpwnam::
* getpwnam_r::
* getpwuid::
* getpwuid_r::
* getrlimit::
* getrusage::
* gets::
* getservbyname::
* getservbyport::
* getservent::
* getsid::
* getsockname::
* getsockopt::
* getsubopt::
* gettimeofday::
* getuid::
* getutxent::
* getutxid::
* getutxline::
* getwc::
* getwchar::
* glob::
* globfree::
* gmtime::
* gmtime_r::
* grantpt::
* hcreate::
* hdestroy::
* hsearch::
* htonl::
* htons::
* hypot::
* hypotf::
* hypotl::
* iconv::
* iconv_close::
* iconv_open::
* if_freenameindex::
* if_indextoname::
* if_nameindex::
* if_nametoindex::
* ilogb::
* ilogbf::
* ilogbl::
* imaxabs::
* imaxdiv::
* inet_addr::
* inet_ntoa::
* inet_ntop::
* inet_pton::
* initstate::
* insque::
* ioctl::
* isalnum::
* isalnum_l::
* isalpha::
* isalpha_l::
* isascii::
* isastream::
* isatty::
* isblank::
* isblank_l::
* iscntrl::
* iscntrl_l::
* isdigit::
* isdigit_l::
* isfinite::
* isgraph::
* isgraph_l::
* isgreater::
* isgreaterequal::
* isinf::
* isless::
* islessequal::
* islessgreater::
* islower::
* islower_l::
* isnan::
* isnormal::
* isprint::
* isprint_l::
* ispunct::
* ispunct_l::
* isspace::
* isspace_l::
* isunordered::
* isupper::
* isupper_l::
* iswalnum::
* iswalnum_l::
* iswalpha::
* iswalpha_l::
* iswblank::
* iswblank_l::
* iswcntrl::
* iswcntrl_l::
* iswctype::
* iswctype_l::
* iswdigit::
* iswdigit_l::
* iswgraph::
* iswgraph_l::
* iswlower::
* iswlower_l::
* iswprint::
* iswprint_l::
* iswpunct::
* iswpunct_l::
* iswspace::
* iswspace_l::
* iswupper::
* iswupper_l::
* iswxdigit::
* iswxdigit_l::
* isxdigit::
* isxdigit_l::
* j0::
* j1::
* jn::
* jrand48::
* kill::
* killpg::
* l64a::
* labs::
* lchown::
* lcong48::
* ldexp::
* ldexpf::
* ldexpl::
* ldiv::
* lfind::
* lgamma::
* lgammaf::
* lgammal::
* link::
* linkat::
* lio_listio::
* listen::
* llabs::
* lldiv::
* llogb::
* llogbf::
* llogbl::
* llrint::
* llrintf::
* llrintl::
* llround::
* llroundf::
* llroundl::
* localeconv::
* localtime::
* localtime_r::
* lockf::
* log::
* log10::
* log10f::
* log10l::
* log1p::
* log1pf::
* log1pl::
* log2::
* log2f::
* log2l::
* logb::
* logbf::
* logbl::
* logf::
* logl::
* longjmp::
* lrand48::
* lrint::
* lrintf::
* lrintl::
* lround::
* lroundf::
* lroundl::
* lsearch::
* lseek::
* lstat::
* malloc::
* mblen::
* mbrlen::
* mbrtoc16::
* mbrtoc32::
* mbrtowc::
* mbsinit::
* mbsnrtowcs::
* mbsrtowcs::
* mbstowcs::
* mbtowc::
* memccpy::
* memchr::
* memcmp::
* memcpy::
* memmove::
* memset::
* mkdir::
* mkdirat::
* mkdtemp::
* mkfifo::
* mkfifoat::
* mknod::
* mknodat::
* mkstemp::
* mktime::
* mlock::
* mlockall::
* mmap::
* modf::
* modff::
* modfl::
* mprotect::
* mq_close::
* mq_getattr::
* mq_notify::
* mq_open::
* mq_receive::
* mq_send::
* mq_setattr::
* mq_timedreceive::
* mq_timedsend::
* mq_unlink::
* mrand48::
* msgctl::
* msgget::
* msgrcv::
* msgsnd::
* msync::
* mtx_destroy::
* mtx_init::
* mtx_lock::
* mtx_timedlock::
* mtx_trylock::
* mtx_unlock::
* munlock::
* munlockall::
* munmap::
* nan::
* nanf::
* nanl::
* nanosleep::
* nearbyint::
* nearbyintf::
* nearbyintl::
* newlocale::
* nextafter::
* nextafterf::
* nextafterl::
* nextdown::
* nextdownf::
* nextdownl::
* nexttoward::
* nexttowardf::
* nexttowardl::
* nextup::
* nextupf::
* nextupl::
* nftw::
* nice::
* nl_langinfo::
* nl_langinfo_l::
* nrand48::
* ntohl::
* ntohs::
* open::
* openat::
* opendir::
* openlog::
* open_memstream::
* open_wmemstream::
* optarg::
* opterr::
* optind::
* optopt::
* pathconf::
* pause::
* pclose::
* perror::
* pipe::
* poll::
* popen::
* posix_fadvise::
* posix_fallocate::
* posix_madvise::
* posix_mem_offset::
* posix_memalign::
* posix_openpt::
* posix_spawn::
* posix_spawn_file_actions_addclose::
* posix_spawn_file_actions_adddup2::
* posix_spawn_file_actions_addopen::
* posix_spawn_file_actions_destroy::
* posix_spawn_file_actions_init::
* posix_spawnattr_destroy::
* posix_spawnattr_getflags::
* posix_spawnattr_getpgroup::
* posix_spawnattr_getschedparam::
* posix_spawnattr_getschedpolicy::
* posix_spawnattr_getsigdefault::
* posix_spawnattr_getsigmask::
* posix_spawnattr_init::
* posix_spawnattr_setflags::
* posix_spawnattr_setpgroup::
* posix_spawnattr_setschedparam::
* posix_spawnattr_setschedpolicy::
* posix_spawnattr_setsigdefault::
* posix_spawnattr_setsigmask::
* posix_spawnp::
* posix_trace_attr_destroy::
* posix_trace_attr_getclockres::
* posix_trace_attr_getcreatetime::
* posix_trace_attr_getgenversion::
* posix_trace_attr_getinherited::
* posix_trace_attr_getlogfullpolicy::
* posix_trace_attr_getlogsize::
* posix_trace_attr_getmaxdatasize::
* posix_trace_attr_getmaxsystemeventsize::
* posix_trace_attr_getmaxusereventsize::
* posix_trace_attr_getname::
* posix_trace_attr_getstreamfullpolicy::
* posix_trace_attr_getstreamsize::
* posix_trace_attr_init::
* posix_trace_attr_setinherited::
* posix_trace_attr_setlogfullpolicy::
* posix_trace_attr_setlogsize::
* posix_trace_attr_setmaxdatasize::
* posix_trace_attr_setname::
* posix_trace_attr_setstreamfullpolicy::
* posix_trace_attr_setstreamsize::
* posix_trace_clear::
* posix_trace_close::
* posix_trace_create::
* posix_trace_create_withlog::
* posix_trace_event::
* posix_trace_eventid_equal::
* posix_trace_eventid_get_name::
* posix_trace_eventid_open::
* posix_trace_eventset_add::
* posix_trace_eventset_del::
* posix_trace_eventset_empty::
* posix_trace_eventset_fill::
* posix_trace_eventset_ismember::
* posix_trace_eventtypelist_getnext_id::
* posix_trace_eventtypelist_rewind::
* posix_trace_flush::
* posix_trace_get_attr::
* posix_trace_get_filter::
* posix_trace_get_status::
* posix_trace_getnext_event::
* posix_trace_open::
* posix_trace_rewind::
* posix_trace_set_filter::
* posix_trace_shutdown::
* posix_trace_start::
* posix_trace_stop::
* posix_trace_timedgetnext_event::
* posix_trace_trid_eventid_open::
* posix_trace_trygetnext_event::
* posix_typed_mem_get_info::
* posix_typed_mem_open::
* pow::
* powf::
* powl::
* pread::
* printf::
* pselect::
* psiginfo::
* psignal::
* pthread_atfork::
* pthread_attr_destroy::
* pthread_attr_getdetachstate::
* pthread_attr_getguardsize::
* pthread_attr_getinheritsched::
* pthread_attr_getschedparam::
* pthread_attr_getschedpolicy::
* pthread_attr_getscope::
* pthread_attr_getstack::
* pthread_attr_getstacksize::
* pthread_attr_init::
* pthread_attr_setdetachstate::
* pthread_attr_setguardsize::
* pthread_attr_setinheritsched::
* pthread_attr_setschedparam::
* pthread_attr_setschedpolicy::
* pthread_attr_setscope::
* pthread_attr_setstack::
* pthread_attr_setstacksize::
* pthread_barrier_destroy::
* pthread_barrier_init::
* pthread_barrier_wait::
* pthread_barrierattr_destroy::
* pthread_barrierattr_getpshared::
* pthread_barrierattr_init::
* pthread_barrierattr_setpshared::
* pthread_cancel::
* pthread_cleanup_pop::
* pthread_cleanup_push::
* pthread_cond_broadcast::
* pthread_cond_destroy::
* pthread_cond_init::
* pthread_cond_signal::
* pthread_cond_timedwait::
* pthread_cond_wait::
* pthread_condattr_destroy::
* pthread_condattr_getclock::
* pthread_condattr_getpshared::
* pthread_condattr_init::
* pthread_condattr_setclock::
* pthread_condattr_setpshared::
* pthread_create::
* pthread_detach::
* pthread_equal::
* pthread_exit::
* pthread_getconcurrency::
* pthread_getcpuclockid::
* pthread_getschedparam::
* pthread_getspecific::
* pthread_join::
* pthread_key_create::
* pthread_key_delete::
* pthread_kill::
* pthread_mutex_consistent::
* pthread_mutex_destroy::
* pthread_mutex_getprioceiling::
* pthread_mutex_init::
* pthread_mutex_lock::
* pthread_mutex_setprioceiling::
* pthread_mutex_timedlock::
* pthread_mutex_trylock::
* pthread_mutex_unlock::
* pthread_mutexattr_destroy::
* pthread_mutexattr_getprioceiling::
* pthread_mutexattr_getprotocol::
* pthread_mutexattr_getpshared::
* pthread_mutexattr_getrobust::
* pthread_mutexattr_gettype::
* pthread_mutexattr_init::
* pthread_mutexattr_setprioceiling::
* pthread_mutexattr_setprotocol::
* pthread_mutexattr_setpshared::
* pthread_mutexattr_setrobust::
* pthread_mutexattr_settype::
* pthread_once::
* pthread_rwlock_destroy::
* pthread_rwlock_init::
* pthread_rwlock_rdlock::
* pthread_rwlock_timedrdlock::
* pthread_rwlock_timedwrlock::
* pthread_rwlock_tryrdlock::
* pthread_rwlock_trywrlock::
* pthread_rwlock_unlock::
* pthread_rwlock_wrlock::
* pthread_rwlockattr_destroy::
* pthread_rwlockattr_getpshared::
* pthread_rwlockattr_init::
* pthread_rwlockattr_setpshared::
* pthread_self::
* pthread_setcancelstate::
* pthread_setcanceltype::
* pthread_setconcurrency::
* pthread_setschedparam::
* pthread_setschedprio::
* pthread_setspecific::
* pthread_sigmask::
* pthread_spin_destroy::
* pthread_spin_init::
* pthread_spin_lock::
* pthread_spin_trylock::
* pthread_spin_unlock::
* pthread_testcancel::
* ptsname::
* putc::
* putc_unlocked::
* putchar::
* putchar_unlocked::
* putenv::
* putmsg::
* putpmsg::
* puts::
* pututxline::
* putwc::
* putwchar::
* pwrite::
* qsort::
* quick_exit::
* raise::
* rand::
* rand_r::
* random::
* read::
* readdir::
* readdir_r::
* readlink::
* readlinkat::
* readv::
* realloc::
* realpath::
* recv::
* recvfrom::
* recvmsg::
* regcomp::
* regerror::
* regexec::
* regfree::
* remainder::
* remainderf::
* remainderl::
* remove::
* remque::
* remquo::
* remquof::
* remquol::
* rename::
* renameat::
* rewind::
* rewinddir::
* rint::
* rintf::
* rintl::
* rmdir::
* round::
* roundeven::
* roundevenf::
* roundevenl::
* roundf::
* roundl::
* scalbln::
* scalblnf::
* scalblnl::
* scalbn::
* scalbnf::
* scalbnl::
* scandir::
* scanf::
* sched_get_priority_max::
* sched_get_priority_min::
* sched_getparam::
* sched_getscheduler::
* sched_rr_get_interval::
* sched_setparam::
* sched_setscheduler::
* sched_yield::
* seed48::
* seekdir::
* select::
* sem_close::
* sem_destroy::
* sem_getvalue::
* sem_init::
* sem_open::
* sem_post::
* sem_timedwait::
* sem_trywait::
* sem_unlink::
* sem_wait::
* semctl::
* semget::
* semop::
* send::
* sendmsg::
* sendto::
* setbuf::
* setegid::
* setenv::
* seteuid::
* setgid::
* setgrent::
* sethostent::
* setitimer::
* setjmp::
* setkey::
* setlocale::
* setlogmask::
* setnetent::
* setpayload::
* setpayloadf::
* setpayloadl::
* setpayloadsig::
* setpayloadsigf::
* setpayloadsigl::
* setpgid::
* setpgrp::
* setpriority::
* setprotoent::
* setpwent::
* setregid::
* setreuid::
* setrlimit::
* setservent::
* setsid::
* setsockopt::
* setstate::
* setuid::
* setutxent::
* setvbuf::
* shm_open::
* shm_unlink::
* shmat::
* shmctl::
* shmdt::
* shmget::
* shutdown::
* sigaction::
* sigaddset::
* sigaltstack::
* sigdelset::
* sigemptyset::
* sigfillset::
* sighold::
* sigignore::
* siginterrupt::
* sigismember::
* siglongjmp::
* signal::
* signbit::
* signgam::
* sigpause::
* sigpending::
* sigprocmask::
* sigqueue::
* sigrelse::
* sigset::
* sigsetjmp::
* sigsuspend::
* sigtimedwait::
* sigwait::
* sigwaitinfo::
* sin::
* sinf::
* sinh::
* sinhf::
* sinhl::
* sinl::
* sleep::
* snprintf::
* sockatmark::
* socket::
* socketpair::
* sprintf::
* sqrt::
* sqrtf::
* sqrtl::
* srand::
* srand48::
* srandom::
* sscanf::
* stat::
* statvfs::
* stderr::
* stdin::
* stdout::
* stpcpy::
* stpncpy::
* strcasecmp::
* strcasecmp_l::
* strcat::
* strchr::
* strcmp::
* strcoll::
* strcoll_l::
* strcpy::
* strcspn::
* strdup::
* strerror::
* strerror_l::
* strerror_r::
* strfmon::
* strfmon_l::
* strfromd::
* strfromf::
* strfroml::
* strftime::
* strftime_l::
* strlen::
* strncasecmp::
* strncasecmp_l::
* strncat::
* strncmp::
* strncpy::
* strndup::
* strnlen::
* strpbrk::
* strptime::
* strrchr::
* strsignal::
* strspn::
* strstr::
* strtod::
* strtof::
* strtoimax::
* strtok::
* strtok_r::
* strtol::
* strtold::
* strtoll::
* strtoul::
* strtoull::
* strtoumax::
* strxfrm::
* strxfrm_l::
* swab::
* swprintf::
* swscanf::
* symlink::
* symlinkat::
* sync::
* sysconf::
* syslog::
* system::
* tan::
* tanf::
* tanh::
* tanhf::
* tanhl::
* tanl::
* tcdrain::
* tcflow::
* tcflush::
* tcgetattr::
* tcgetpgrp::
* tcgetsid::
* tcsendbreak::
* tcsetattr::
* tcsetpgrp::
* tdelete::
* telldir::
* tempnam::
* tfind::
* tgamma::
* tgammaf::
* tgammal::
* thrd_create::
* thrd_current::
* thrd_detach::
* thrd_equal::
* thrd_exit::
* thrd_join::
* thrd_sleep::
* thrd_yield::
* time::
* timer_create::
* timer_delete::
* timer_getoverrun::
* timer_gettime::
* timer_settime::
* times::
* timespec_getres::
* timezone::
* tmpfile::
* tmpnam::
* toascii::
* tolower::
* tolower_l::
* totalorder::
* totalorderf::
* totalorderl::
* totalordermag::
* totalordermagf::
* totalordermagl::
* toupper::
* toupper_l::
* towctrans::
* towctrans_l::
* towlower::
* towlower_l::
* towupper::
* towupper_l::
* trunc::
* truncate::
* truncf::
* truncl::
* tsearch::
* tss_create::
* tss_delete::
* tss_get::
* tss_set::
* ttyname::
* ttyname_r::
* twalk::
* tzname::
* tzset::
* ufromfp::
* ufromfpf::
* ufromfpl::
* ufromfpx::
* ufromfpxf::
* ufromfpxl::
* ulimit::
* umask::
* uname::
* ungetc::
* ungetwc::
* unlink::
* unlinkat::
* unlockpt::
* unsetenv::
* uselocale::
* utime::
* utimensat::
* utimes::
* va_arg::
* va_copy::
* va_end::
* va_start::
* vdprintf::
* vfprintf::
* vfscanf::
* vfwprintf::
* vfwscanf::
* vprintf::
* vscanf::
* vsnprintf::
* vsprintf::
* vsscanf::
* vswprintf::
* vswscanf::
* vwprintf::
* vwscanf::
* wait::
* waitid::
* waitpid::
* wcpcpy::
* wcpncpy::
* wcrtomb::
* wcscasecmp::
* wcscasecmp_l::
* wcscat::
* wcschr::
* wcscmp::
* wcscoll::
* wcscoll_l::
* wcscpy::
* wcscspn::
* wcsdup::
* wcsftime::
* wcslen::
* wcsncasecmp::
* wcsncasecmp_l::
* wcsncat::
* wcsncmp::
* wcsncpy::
* wcsnlen::
* wcsnrtombs::
* wcspbrk::
* wcsrchr::
* wcsrtombs::
* wcsspn::
* wcsstr::
* wcstod::
* wcstof::
* wcstoimax::
* wcstok::
* wcstol::
* wcstold::
* wcstoll::
* wcstombs::
* wcstoul::
* wcstoull::
* wcstoumax::
* wcswidth::
* wcsxfrm::
* wcsxfrm_l::
* wctob::
* wctomb::
* wctrans::
* wctrans_l::
* wctype::
* wctype_l::
* wcwidth::
* wmemchr::
* wmemcmp::
* wmemcpy::
* wmemmove::
* wmemset::
* wordexp::
* wordfree::
* wprintf::
* write::
* writev::
* wscanf::
* y0::
* y1::
* yn::
@end menu

@include posix-functions/FD_CLR.texi
@include posix-functions/FD_ISSET.texi
@include posix-functions/FD_SET.texi
@include posix-functions/FD_ZERO.texi
@include posix-functions/_Exit_C99.texi
@include posix-functions/_exit.texi
@include posix-functions/_longjmp.texi
@include posix-functions/_setjmp.texi
@include posix-functions/_tolower.texi
@include posix-functions/_toupper.texi
@include posix-functions/a64l.texi
@include posix-functions/abort.texi
@include posix-functions/abs.texi
@include posix-functions/accept.texi
@include posix-functions/access.texi
@include posix-functions/acos.texi
@include posix-functions/acosf.texi
@include posix-functions/acosh.texi
@include posix-functions/acoshf.texi
@include posix-functions/acoshl.texi
@include posix-functions/acosl.texi
@include posix-functions/aio_cancel.texi
@include posix-functions/aio_error.texi
@include posix-functions/aio_fsync.texi
@include posix-functions/aio_read.texi
@include posix-functions/aio_return.texi
@include posix-functions/aio_suspend.texi
@include posix-functions/aio_write.texi
@include posix-functions/alarm.texi
@include posix-functions/aligned_alloc.texi
@include posix-functions/alphasort.texi
@include posix-functions/asctime.texi
@include posix-functions/asctime_r.texi
@include posix-functions/asin.texi
@include posix-functions/asinf.texi
@include posix-functions/asinh.texi
@include posix-functions/asinhf.texi
@include posix-functions/asinhl.texi
@include posix-functions/asinl.texi
@include posix-functions/assert.texi
@include posix-functions/atan.texi
@include posix-functions/atan2.texi
@include posix-functions/atan2f.texi
@include posix-functions/atan2l.texi
@include posix-functions/atanf.texi
@include posix-functions/atanh.texi
@include posix-functions/atanhf.texi
@include posix-functions/atanhl.texi
@include posix-functions/atanl.texi
@include posix-functions/atexit.texi
@include posix-functions/atof.texi
@include posix-functions/atoi.texi
@include posix-functions/atol.texi
@include posix-functions/atoll.texi
@include posix-functions/basename.texi
@include posix-functions/bind.texi
@include posix-functions/bsearch.texi
@include posix-functions/btowc.texi
@include posix-functions/c16rtomb.texi
@include posix-functions/c32rtomb.texi
@include posix-functions/cabs.texi
@include posix-functions/cabsf.texi
@include posix-functions/cabsl.texi
@include posix-functions/cacos.texi
@include posix-functions/cacosf.texi
@include posix-functions/cacosh.texi
@include posix-functions/cacoshf.texi
@include posix-functions/cacoshl.texi
@include posix-functions/cacosl.texi
@include posix-functions/calloc.texi
@include posix-functions/call_once.texi
@include posix-functions/canonicalize.texi
@include posix-functions/canonicalizef.texi
@include posix-functions/canonicalizel.texi
@include posix-functions/carg.texi
@include posix-functions/cargf.texi
@include posix-functions/cargl.texi
@include posix-functions/casin.texi
@include posix-functions/casinf.texi
@include posix-functions/casinh.texi
@include posix-functions/casinhf.texi
@include posix-functions/casinhl.texi
@include posix-functions/casinl.texi
@include posix-functions/catan.texi
@include posix-functions/catanf.texi
@include posix-functions/catanh.texi
@include posix-functions/catanhf.texi
@include posix-functions/catanhl.texi
@include posix-functions/catanl.texi
@include posix-functions/catclose.texi
@include posix-functions/catgets.texi
@include posix-functions/catopen.texi
@include posix-functions/cbrt.texi
@include posix-functions/cbrtf.texi
@include posix-functions/cbrtl.texi
@include posix-functions/ccos.texi
@include posix-functions/ccosf.texi
@include posix-functions/ccosh.texi
@include posix-functions/ccoshf.texi
@include posix-functions/ccoshl.texi
@include posix-functions/ccosl.texi
@include posix-functions/ceil.texi
@include posix-functions/ceilf.texi
@include posix-functions/ceill.texi
@include posix-functions/cexp.texi
@include posix-functions/cexpf.texi
@include posix-functions/cexpl.texi
@include posix-functions/cfgetispeed.texi
@include posix-functions/cfgetospeed.texi
@include posix-functions/cfsetispeed.texi
@include posix-functions/cfsetospeed.texi
@include posix-functions/chdir.texi
@include posix-functions/chmod.texi
@include posix-functions/chown.texi
@include posix-functions/cimag.texi
@include posix-functions/cimagf.texi
@include posix-functions/cimagl.texi
@include posix-functions/clearerr.texi
@include posix-functions/clock.texi
@include posix-functions/clock_getcpuclockid.texi
@include posix-functions/clock_getres.texi
@include posix-functions/clock_gettime.texi
@include posix-functions/clock_nanosleep.texi
@include posix-functions/clock_settime.texi
@include posix-functions/clog.texi
@include posix-functions/clogf.texi
@include posix-functions/clogl.texi
@include posix-functions/close.texi
@include posix-functions/closedir.texi
@include posix-functions/closelog.texi
@include posix-functions/cnd_broadcast.texi
@include posix-functions/cnd_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/cnd_init.texi
@include posix-functions/cnd_signal.texi
@include posix-functions/cnd_timedwait.texi
@include posix-functions/cnd_wait.texi
@include posix-functions/confstr.texi
@include posix-functions/conj.texi
@include posix-functions/conjf.texi
@include posix-functions/conjl.texi
@include posix-functions/connect.texi
@include posix-functions/copysign.texi
@include posix-functions/copysignf.texi
@include posix-functions/copysignl.texi
@include posix-functions/cos.texi
@include posix-functions/cosf.texi
@include posix-functions/cosh.texi
@include posix-functions/coshf.texi
@include posix-functions/coshl.texi
@include posix-functions/cosl.texi
@include posix-functions/cpow.texi
@include posix-functions/cpowf.texi
@include posix-functions/cpowl.texi
@include posix-functions/cproj.texi
@include posix-functions/cprojf.texi
@include posix-functions/cprojl.texi
@include posix-functions/creal.texi
@include posix-functions/crealf.texi
@include posix-functions/creall.texi
@include posix-functions/creat.texi
@include posix-functions/crypt.texi
@include posix-functions/csin.texi
@include posix-functions/csinf.texi
@include posix-functions/csinh.texi
@include posix-functions/csinhf.texi
@include posix-functions/csinhl.texi
@include posix-functions/csinl.texi
@include posix-functions/csqrt.texi
@include posix-functions/csqrtf.texi
@include posix-functions/csqrtl.texi
@include posix-functions/ctan.texi
@include posix-functions/ctanf.texi
@include posix-functions/ctanh.texi
@include posix-functions/ctanhf.texi
@include posix-functions/ctanhl.texi
@include posix-functions/ctanl.texi
@include posix-functions/ctermid.texi
@include posix-functions/ctime.texi
@include posix-functions/ctime_r.texi
@include posix-functions/daddl.texi
@include posix-functions/daylight.texi
@include posix-functions/dbm_clearerr.texi
@include posix-functions/dbm_close.texi
@include posix-functions/dbm_delete.texi
@include posix-functions/dbm_error.texi
@include posix-functions/dbm_fetch.texi
@include posix-functions/dbm_firstkey.texi
@include posix-functions/dbm_nextkey.texi
@include posix-functions/dbm_open.texi
@include posix-functions/dbm_store.texi
@include posix-functions/ddivl.texi
@include posix-functions/difftime.texi
@include posix-functions/dirfd.texi
@include posix-functions/dirname.texi
@include posix-functions/div.texi
@include posix-functions/dlclose.texi
@include posix-functions/dlerror.texi
@include posix-functions/dlopen.texi
@include posix-functions/dlsym.texi
@include posix-functions/dmull.texi
@include posix-functions/dprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/drand48.texi
@include posix-functions/dsubl.texi
@include posix-functions/dup.texi
@include posix-functions/dup2.texi
@include posix-functions/duplocale.texi
@include posix-functions/encrypt.texi
@include posix-functions/endgrent.texi
@include posix-functions/endhostent.texi
@include posix-functions/endnetent.texi
@include posix-functions/endprotoent.texi
@include posix-functions/endpwent.texi
@include posix-functions/endservent.texi
@include posix-functions/endutxent.texi
@include posix-functions/environ.texi
@include posix-functions/erand48.texi
@include posix-functions/erf.texi
@include posix-functions/erfc.texi
@include posix-functions/erfcf.texi
@include posix-functions/erfcl.texi
@include posix-functions/erff.texi
@include posix-functions/erfl.texi
@include posix-functions/errno.texi
@include posix-functions/execl.texi
@include posix-functions/execle.texi
@include posix-functions/execlp.texi
@include posix-functions/execv.texi
@include posix-functions/execve.texi
@include posix-functions/execvp.texi
@include posix-functions/exit.texi
@include posix-functions/exp.texi
@include posix-functions/exp2.texi
@include posix-functions/exp2f.texi
@include posix-functions/exp2l.texi
@include posix-functions/expf.texi
@include posix-functions/expl.texi
@include posix-functions/expm1.texi
@include posix-functions/expm1f.texi
@include posix-functions/expm1l.texi
@include posix-functions/fabs.texi
@include posix-functions/fabsf.texi
@include posix-functions/fabsl.texi
@include posix-functions/faccessat.texi
@include posix-functions/fadd.texi
@include posix-functions/faddl.texi
@include posix-functions/fattach.texi
@include posix-functions/fchdir.texi
@include posix-functions/fchmod.texi
@include posix-functions/fchmodat.texi
@include posix-functions/fchown.texi
@include posix-functions/fchownat.texi
@include posix-functions/fclose.texi
@include posix-functions/fcntl.texi
@include posix-functions/fdatasync.texi
@include posix-functions/fdetach.texi
@include posix-functions/fdim.texi
@include posix-functions/fdimf.texi
@include posix-functions/fdiml.texi
@include posix-functions/fdiv.texi
@include posix-functions/fdivl.texi
@include posix-functions/fdopen.texi
@include posix-functions/fdopendir.texi
@include posix-functions/feclearexcept.texi
@include posix-functions/fegetenv.texi
@include posix-functions/fegetexceptflag.texi
@include posix-functions/fegetmode.texi
@include posix-functions/fegetround.texi
@include posix-functions/feholdexcept.texi
@include posix-functions/feof.texi
@include posix-functions/feraiseexcept.texi
@include posix-functions/ferror.texi
@include posix-functions/fesetenv.texi
@include posix-functions/fesetexcept.texi
@include posix-functions/fesetexceptflag.texi
@include posix-functions/fesetmode.texi
@include posix-functions/fesetround.texi
@include posix-functions/fetestexcept.texi
@include posix-functions/fetestexceptflag.texi
@include posix-functions/feupdateenv.texi
@include posix-functions/fexecve.texi
@include posix-functions/fflush.texi
@include posix-functions/ffs.texi
@include posix-functions/fgetc.texi
@include posix-functions/fgetpos.texi
@include posix-functions/fgets.texi
@include posix-functions/fgetwc.texi
@include posix-functions/fgetws.texi
@include posix-functions/fileno.texi
@include posix-functions/flockfile.texi
@include posix-functions/floor.texi
@include posix-functions/floorf.texi
@include posix-functions/floorl.texi
@include posix-functions/fma.texi
@include posix-functions/fmaf.texi
@include posix-functions/fmal.texi
@include posix-functions/fmax.texi
@include posix-functions/fmaxf.texi
@include posix-functions/fmaxl.texi
@include posix-functions/fmaxmag.texi
@include posix-functions/fmaxmagf.texi
@include posix-functions/fmaxmagl.texi
@include posix-functions/fmemopen.texi
@include posix-functions/fmin.texi
@include posix-functions/fminf.texi
@include posix-functions/fminl.texi
@include posix-functions/fminmag.texi
@include posix-functions/fminmagf.texi
@include posix-functions/fminmagl.texi
@include posix-functions/fmod.texi
@include posix-functions/fmodf.texi
@include posix-functions/fmodl.texi
@include posix-functions/fmtmsg.texi
@include posix-functions/fmul.texi
@include posix-functions/fmull.texi
@include posix-functions/fnmatch.texi
@include posix-functions/fopen.texi
@include posix-functions/fork.texi
@include posix-functions/fpathconf.texi
@include posix-functions/fpclassify.texi
@include posix-functions/fprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/fputc.texi
@include posix-functions/fputs.texi
@include posix-functions/fputwc.texi
@include posix-functions/fputws.texi
@include posix-functions/fread.texi
@include posix-functions/free.texi
@include posix-functions/freeaddrinfo.texi
@include posix-functions/freelocale.texi
@include posix-functions/freopen.texi
@include posix-functions/frexp.texi
@include posix-functions/frexpf.texi
@include posix-functions/frexpl.texi
@include posix-functions/fromfp.texi
@include posix-functions/fromfpf.texi
@include posix-functions/fromfpl.texi
@include posix-functions/fromfpx.texi
@include posix-functions/fromfpxf.texi
@include posix-functions/fromfpxl.texi
@include posix-functions/fscanf.texi
@include posix-functions/fseek.texi
@include posix-functions/fseeko.texi
@include posix-functions/fsetpos.texi
@include posix-functions/fstat.texi
@include posix-functions/fstatat.texi
@include posix-functions/fstatvfs.texi
@include posix-functions/fsub.texi
@include posix-functions/fsubl.texi
@include posix-functions/fsync.texi
@include posix-functions/ftell.texi
@include posix-functions/ftello.texi
@include posix-functions/ftok.texi
@include posix-functions/ftruncate.texi
@include posix-functions/ftrylockfile.texi
@include posix-functions/ftw.texi
@include posix-functions/funlockfile.texi
@include posix-functions/futimens.texi
@include posix-functions/fwide.texi
@include posix-functions/fwprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/fwrite.texi
@include posix-functions/fwscanf.texi
@include posix-functions/gai_strerror.texi
@include posix-functions/getaddrinfo.texi
@include posix-functions/getc.texi
@include posix-functions/getc_unlocked.texi
@include posix-functions/getchar.texi
@include posix-functions/getchar_unlocked.texi
@include posix-functions/getcwd.texi
@include posix-functions/getdate.texi
@include posix-functions/getdate_err.texi
@include posix-functions/getdelim.texi
@include posix-functions/getegid.texi
@include posix-functions/getenv.texi
@include posix-functions/geteuid.texi
@include posix-functions/getgid.texi
@include posix-functions/getgrent.texi
@include posix-functions/getgrgid.texi
@include posix-functions/getgrgid_r.texi
@include posix-functions/getgrnam.texi
@include posix-functions/getgrnam_r.texi
@include posix-functions/getgroups.texi
@include posix-functions/gethostent.texi
@include posix-functions/gethostid.texi
@include posix-functions/gethostname.texi
@include posix-functions/getitimer.texi
@include posix-functions/getline.texi
@include posix-functions/getlogin.texi
@include posix-functions/getlogin_r.texi
@include posix-functions/getmsg.texi
@include posix-functions/getnameinfo.texi
@include posix-functions/getnetbyaddr.texi
@include posix-functions/getnetbyname.texi
@include posix-functions/getnetent.texi
@include posix-functions/getopt.texi
@include posix-functions/getpayload.texi
@include posix-functions/getpayloadf.texi
@include posix-functions/getpayloadl.texi
@include posix-functions/getpeername.texi
@include posix-functions/getpgid.texi
@include posix-functions/getpgrp.texi
@include posix-functions/getpid.texi
@include posix-functions/getpmsg.texi
@include posix-functions/getppid.texi
@include posix-functions/getpriority.texi
@include posix-functions/getprotobyname.texi
@include posix-functions/getprotobynumber.texi
@include posix-functions/getprotoent.texi
@include posix-functions/getpwent.texi
@include posix-functions/getpwnam.texi
@include posix-functions/getpwnam_r.texi
@include posix-functions/getpwuid.texi
@include posix-functions/getpwuid_r.texi
@include posix-functions/getrlimit.texi
@include posix-functions/getrusage.texi
@include posix-functions/gets.texi
@include posix-functions/getservbyname.texi
@include posix-functions/getservbyport.texi
@include posix-functions/getservent.texi
@include posix-functions/getsid.texi
@include posix-functions/getsockname.texi
@include posix-functions/getsockopt.texi
@include posix-functions/getsubopt.texi
@include posix-functions/gettimeofday.texi
@include posix-functions/getuid.texi
@include posix-functions/getutxent.texi
@include posix-functions/getutxid.texi
@include posix-functions/getutxline.texi
@include posix-functions/getwc.texi
@include posix-functions/getwchar.texi
@include posix-functions/glob.texi
@include posix-functions/globfree.texi
@include posix-functions/gmtime.texi
@include posix-functions/gmtime_r.texi
@include posix-functions/grantpt.texi
@include posix-functions/hcreate.texi
@include posix-functions/hdestroy.texi
@include posix-functions/hsearch.texi
@include posix-functions/htonl.texi
@include posix-functions/htons.texi
@include posix-functions/hypot.texi
@include posix-functions/hypotf.texi
@include posix-functions/hypotl.texi
@include posix-functions/iconv.texi
@include posix-functions/iconv_close.texi
@include posix-functions/iconv_open.texi
@include posix-functions/if_freenameindex.texi
@include posix-functions/if_indextoname.texi
@include posix-functions/if_nameindex.texi
@include posix-functions/if_nametoindex.texi
@include posix-functions/ilogb.texi
@include posix-functions/ilogbf.texi
@include posix-functions/ilogbl.texi
@include posix-functions/imaxabs.texi
@include posix-functions/imaxdiv.texi
@include posix-functions/inet_addr.texi
@include posix-functions/inet_ntoa.texi
@include posix-functions/inet_ntop.texi
@include posix-functions/inet_pton.texi
@include posix-functions/initstate.texi
@include posix-functions/insque.texi
@include posix-functions/ioctl.texi
@include posix-functions/isalnum.texi
@include posix-functions/isalnum_l.texi
@include posix-functions/isalpha.texi
@include posix-functions/isalpha_l.texi
@include posix-functions/isascii.texi
@include posix-functions/isastream.texi
@include posix-functions/isatty.texi
@include posix-functions/isblank.texi
@include posix-functions/isblank_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iscntrl.texi
@include posix-functions/iscntrl_l.texi
@include posix-functions/isdigit.texi
@include posix-functions/isdigit_l.texi
@include posix-functions/isfinite.texi
@include posix-functions/isgraph.texi
@include posix-functions/isgraph_l.texi
@include posix-functions/isgreater.texi
@include posix-functions/isgreaterequal.texi
@include posix-functions/isinf.texi
@include posix-functions/isless.texi
@include posix-functions/islessequal.texi
@include posix-functions/islessgreater.texi
@include posix-functions/islower.texi
@include posix-functions/islower_l.texi
@include posix-functions/isnan.texi
@include posix-functions/isnormal.texi
@include posix-functions/isprint.texi
@include posix-functions/isprint_l.texi
@include posix-functions/ispunct.texi
@include posix-functions/ispunct_l.texi
@include posix-functions/isspace.texi
@include posix-functions/isspace_l.texi
@include posix-functions/isunordered.texi
@include posix-functions/isupper.texi
@include posix-functions/isupper_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iswalnum.texi
@include posix-functions/iswalnum_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iswalpha.texi
@include posix-functions/iswalpha_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iswblank.texi
@include posix-functions/iswblank_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iswcntrl.texi
@include posix-functions/iswcntrl_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iswctype.texi
@include posix-functions/iswctype_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iswdigit.texi
@include posix-functions/iswdigit_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iswgraph.texi
@include posix-functions/iswgraph_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iswlower.texi
@include posix-functions/iswlower_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iswprint.texi
@include posix-functions/iswprint_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iswpunct.texi
@include posix-functions/iswpunct_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iswspace.texi
@include posix-functions/iswspace_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iswupper.texi
@include posix-functions/iswupper_l.texi
@include posix-functions/iswxdigit.texi
@include posix-functions/iswxdigit_l.texi
@include posix-functions/isxdigit.texi
@include posix-functions/isxdigit_l.texi
@include posix-functions/j0.texi
@include posix-functions/j1.texi
@include posix-functions/jn.texi
@include posix-functions/jrand48.texi
@include posix-functions/kill.texi
@include posix-functions/killpg.texi
@include posix-functions/l64a.texi
@include posix-functions/labs.texi
@include posix-functions/lchown.texi
@include posix-functions/lcong48.texi
@include posix-functions/ldexp.texi
@include posix-functions/ldexpf.texi
@include posix-functions/ldexpl.texi
@include posix-functions/ldiv.texi
@include posix-functions/lfind.texi
@include posix-functions/lgamma.texi
@include posix-functions/lgammaf.texi
@include posix-functions/lgammal.texi
@include posix-functions/link.texi
@include posix-functions/linkat.texi
@include posix-functions/lio_listio.texi
@include posix-functions/listen.texi
@include posix-functions/llabs.texi
@include posix-functions/lldiv.texi
@include posix-functions/llogb.texi
@include posix-functions/llogbf.texi
@include posix-functions/llogbl.texi
@include posix-functions/llrint.texi
@include posix-functions/llrintf.texi
@include posix-functions/llrintl.texi
@include posix-functions/llround.texi
@include posix-functions/llroundf.texi
@include posix-functions/llroundl.texi
@include posix-functions/localeconv.texi
@include posix-functions/localtime.texi
@include posix-functions/localtime_r.texi
@include posix-functions/lockf.texi
@include posix-functions/log.texi
@include posix-functions/log10.texi
@include posix-functions/log10f.texi
@include posix-functions/log10l.texi
@include posix-functions/log1p.texi
@include posix-functions/log1pf.texi
@include posix-functions/log1pl.texi
@include posix-functions/log2.texi
@include posix-functions/log2f.texi
@include posix-functions/log2l.texi
@include posix-functions/logb.texi
@include posix-functions/logbf.texi
@include posix-functions/logbl.texi
@include posix-functions/logf.texi
@include posix-functions/logl.texi
@include posix-functions/longjmp.texi
@include posix-functions/lrand48.texi
@include posix-functions/lrint.texi
@include posix-functions/lrintf.texi
@include posix-functions/lrintl.texi
@include posix-functions/lround.texi
@include posix-functions/lroundf.texi
@include posix-functions/lroundl.texi
@include posix-functions/lsearch.texi
@include posix-functions/lseek.texi
@include posix-functions/lstat.texi
@include posix-functions/malloc.texi
@include posix-functions/mblen.texi
@include posix-functions/mbrlen.texi
@include posix-functions/mbrtoc16.texi
@include posix-functions/mbrtoc32.texi
@include posix-functions/mbrtowc.texi
@include posix-functions/mbsinit.texi
@include posix-functions/mbsnrtowcs.texi
@include posix-functions/mbsrtowcs.texi
@include posix-functions/mbstowcs.texi
@include posix-functions/mbtowc.texi
@include posix-functions/memccpy.texi
@include posix-functions/memchr.texi
@include posix-functions/memcmp.texi
@include posix-functions/memcpy.texi
@include posix-functions/memmove.texi
@include posix-functions/memset.texi
@include posix-functions/mkdir.texi
@include posix-functions/mkdirat.texi
@include posix-functions/mkdtemp.texi
@include posix-functions/mkfifo.texi
@include posix-functions/mkfifoat.texi
@include posix-functions/mknod.texi
@include posix-functions/mknodat.texi
@include posix-functions/mkstemp.texi
@include posix-functions/mktime.texi
@include posix-functions/mlock.texi
@include posix-functions/mlockall.texi
@include posix-functions/mmap.texi
@include posix-functions/modf.texi
@include posix-functions/modff.texi
@include posix-functions/modfl.texi
@include posix-functions/mprotect.texi
@include posix-functions/mq_close.texi
@include posix-functions/mq_getattr.texi
@include posix-functions/mq_notify.texi
@include posix-functions/mq_open.texi
@include posix-functions/mq_receive.texi
@include posix-functions/mq_send.texi
@include posix-functions/mq_setattr.texi
@include posix-functions/mq_timedreceive.texi
@include posix-functions/mq_timedsend.texi
@include posix-functions/mq_unlink.texi
@include posix-functions/mrand48.texi
@include posix-functions/msgctl.texi
@include posix-functions/msgget.texi
@include posix-functions/msgrcv.texi
@include posix-functions/msgsnd.texi
@include posix-functions/msync.texi
@include posix-functions/mtx_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/mtx_init.texi
@include posix-functions/mtx_lock.texi
@include posix-functions/mtx_timedlock.texi
@include posix-functions/mtx_trylock.texi
@include posix-functions/mtx_unlock.texi
@include posix-functions/munlock.texi
@include posix-functions/munlockall.texi
@include posix-functions/munmap.texi
@include posix-functions/nan.texi
@include posix-functions/nanf.texi
@include posix-functions/nanl.texi
@include posix-functions/nanosleep.texi
@include posix-functions/nearbyint.texi
@include posix-functions/nearbyintf.texi
@include posix-functions/nearbyintl.texi
@include posix-functions/newlocale.texi
@include posix-functions/nextafter.texi
@include posix-functions/nextafterf.texi
@include posix-functions/nextafterl.texi
@include posix-functions/nextdown.texi
@include posix-functions/nextdownf.texi
@include posix-functions/nextdownl.texi
@include posix-functions/nexttoward.texi
@include posix-functions/nexttowardf.texi
@include posix-functions/nexttowardl.texi
@include posix-functions/nextup.texi
@include posix-functions/nextupf.texi
@include posix-functions/nextupl.texi
@include posix-functions/nftw.texi
@include posix-functions/nice.texi
@include posix-functions/nl_langinfo.texi
@include posix-functions/nl_langinfo_l.texi
@include posix-functions/nrand48.texi
@include posix-functions/ntohl.texi
@include posix-functions/ntohs.texi
@include posix-functions/open.texi
@include posix-functions/openat.texi
@include posix-functions/opendir.texi
@include posix-functions/openlog.texi
@include posix-functions/open_memstream.texi
@include posix-functions/open_wmemstream.texi
@include posix-functions/optarg.texi
@include posix-functions/opterr.texi
@include posix-functions/optind.texi
@include posix-functions/optopt.texi
@include posix-functions/pathconf.texi
@include posix-functions/pause.texi
@include posix-functions/pclose.texi
@include posix-functions/perror.texi
@include posix-functions/pipe.texi
@include posix-functions/poll.texi
@include posix-functions/popen.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_fadvise.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_fallocate.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_madvise.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_mem_offset.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_memalign.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_openpt.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawn.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawn_file_actions_addclose.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawn_file_actions_adddup2.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawn_file_actions_addopen.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawn_file_actions_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawn_file_actions_init.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_getflags.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_getpgroup.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_getschedparam.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_getschedpolicy.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_getsigdefault.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_getsigmask.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_init.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_setflags.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_setpgroup.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_setschedparam.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_setschedpolicy.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_setsigdefault.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnattr_setsigmask.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_spawnp.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_getclockres.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_getcreatetime.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_getgenversion.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_getinherited.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_getlogfullpolicy.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_getlogsize.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_getmaxdatasize.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_getmaxsystemeventsize.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_getmaxusereventsize.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_getname.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_getstreamfullpolicy.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_getstreamsize.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_init.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_setinherited.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_setlogfullpolicy.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_setlogsize.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_setmaxdatasize.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_setname.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_setstreamfullpolicy.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_attr_setstreamsize.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_clear.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_close.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_create.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_create_withlog.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_event.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_eventid_equal.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_eventid_get_name.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_eventid_open.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_eventset_add.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_eventset_del.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_eventset_empty.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_eventset_fill.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_eventset_ismember.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_eventtypelist_getnext_id.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_eventtypelist_rewind.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_flush.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_get_attr.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_get_filter.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_get_status.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_getnext_event.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_open.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_rewind.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_set_filter.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_shutdown.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_start.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_stop.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_timedgetnext_event.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_trid_eventid_open.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_trace_trygetnext_event.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_typed_mem_get_info.texi
@include posix-functions/posix_typed_mem_open.texi
@include posix-functions/pow.texi
@include posix-functions/powf.texi
@include posix-functions/powl.texi
@include posix-functions/pread.texi
@include posix-functions/printf.texi
@include posix-functions/pselect.texi
@include posix-functions/psiginfo.texi
@include posix-functions/psignal.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_atfork.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_getdetachstate.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_getguardsize.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_getinheritsched.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_getschedparam.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_getschedpolicy.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_getscope.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_getstack.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_getstacksize.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_init.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_setdetachstate.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_setguardsize.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_setinheritsched.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_setschedparam.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_setschedpolicy.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_setscope.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_setstack.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_attr_setstacksize.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_barrier_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_barrier_init.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_barrier_wait.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_barrierattr_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_barrierattr_getpshared.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_barrierattr_init.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_barrierattr_setpshared.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_cancel.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_cleanup_pop.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_cleanup_push.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_cond_broadcast.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_cond_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_cond_init.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_cond_signal.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_cond_timedwait.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_cond_wait.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_condattr_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_condattr_getclock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_condattr_getpshared.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_condattr_init.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_condattr_setclock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_condattr_setpshared.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_create.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_detach.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_equal.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_exit.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_getconcurrency.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_getcpuclockid.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_getschedparam.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_getspecific.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_join.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_key_create.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_key_delete.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_kill.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutex_consistent.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutex_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutex_getprioceiling.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutex_init.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutex_lock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutex_setprioceiling.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutex_timedlock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutex_trylock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutex_unlock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutexattr_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutexattr_getprioceiling.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutexattr_getprotocol.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutexattr_getpshared.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutexattr_getrobust.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutexattr_gettype.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutexattr_init.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutexattr_setprioceiling.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutexattr_setprotocol.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutexattr_setpshared.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutexattr_setrobust.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_mutexattr_settype.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_once.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_rwlock_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_rwlock_init.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_rwlock_rdlock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_rwlock_timedrdlock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_rwlock_timedwrlock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_rwlock_tryrdlock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_rwlock_trywrlock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_rwlock_unlock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_rwlock_wrlock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_rwlockattr_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_rwlockattr_getpshared.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_rwlockattr_init.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_rwlockattr_setpshared.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_self.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_setcancelstate.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_setcanceltype.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_setconcurrency.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_setschedparam.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_setschedprio.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_setspecific.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_sigmask.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_spin_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_spin_init.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_spin_lock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_spin_trylock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_spin_unlock.texi
@include posix-functions/pthread_testcancel.texi
@include posix-functions/ptsname.texi
@include posix-functions/putc.texi
@include posix-functions/putc_unlocked.texi
@include posix-functions/putchar.texi
@include posix-functions/putchar_unlocked.texi
@include posix-functions/putenv.texi
@include posix-functions/putmsg.texi
@include posix-functions/putpmsg.texi
@include posix-functions/puts.texi
@include posix-functions/pututxline.texi
@include posix-functions/putwc.texi
@include posix-functions/putwchar.texi
@include posix-functions/pwrite.texi
@include posix-functions/qsort.texi
@include posix-functions/quick_exit.texi
@include posix-functions/raise.texi
@include posix-functions/rand.texi
@include posix-functions/rand_r.texi
@include posix-functions/random.texi
@include posix-functions/read.texi
@include posix-functions/readdir.texi
@include posix-functions/readdir_r.texi
@include posix-functions/readlink.texi
@include posix-functions/readlinkat.texi
@include posix-functions/readv.texi
@include posix-functions/realloc.texi
@include posix-functions/realpath.texi
@include posix-functions/recv.texi
@include posix-functions/recvfrom.texi
@include posix-functions/recvmsg.texi
@include posix-functions/regcomp.texi
@include posix-functions/regerror.texi
@include posix-functions/regexec.texi
@include posix-functions/regfree.texi
@include posix-functions/remainder.texi
@include posix-functions/remainderf.texi
@include posix-functions/remainderl.texi
@include posix-functions/remove.texi
@include posix-functions/remque.texi
@include posix-functions/remquo.texi
@include posix-functions/remquof.texi
@include posix-functions/remquol.texi
@include posix-functions/rename.texi
@include posix-functions/renameat.texi
@include posix-functions/rewind.texi
@include posix-functions/rewinddir.texi
@include posix-functions/rint.texi
@include posix-functions/rintf.texi
@include posix-functions/rintl.texi
@include posix-functions/rmdir.texi
@include posix-functions/round.texi
@include posix-functions/roundeven.texi
@include posix-functions/roundevenf.texi
@include posix-functions/roundevenl.texi
@include posix-functions/roundf.texi
@include posix-functions/roundl.texi
@include posix-functions/scalbln.texi
@include posix-functions/scalblnf.texi
@include posix-functions/scalblnl.texi
@include posix-functions/scalbn.texi
@include posix-functions/scalbnf.texi
@include posix-functions/scalbnl.texi
@include posix-functions/scandir.texi
@include posix-functions/scanf.texi
@include posix-functions/sched_get_priority_max.texi
@include posix-functions/sched_get_priority_min.texi
@include posix-functions/sched_getparam.texi
@include posix-functions/sched_getscheduler.texi
@include posix-functions/sched_rr_get_interval.texi
@include posix-functions/sched_setparam.texi
@include posix-functions/sched_setscheduler.texi
@include posix-functions/sched_yield.texi
@include posix-functions/seed48.texi
@include posix-functions/seekdir.texi
@include posix-functions/select.texi
@include posix-functions/sem_close.texi
@include posix-functions/sem_destroy.texi
@include posix-functions/sem_getvalue.texi
@include posix-functions/sem_init.texi
@include posix-functions/sem_open.texi
@include posix-functions/sem_post.texi
@include posix-functions/sem_timedwait.texi
@include posix-functions/sem_trywait.texi
@include posix-functions/sem_unlink.texi
@include posix-functions/sem_wait.texi
@include posix-functions/semctl.texi
@include posix-functions/semget.texi
@include posix-functions/semop.texi
@include posix-functions/send.texi
@include posix-functions/sendmsg.texi
@include posix-functions/sendto.texi
@include posix-functions/setbuf.texi
@include posix-functions/setegid.texi
@include posix-functions/setenv.texi
@include posix-functions/seteuid.texi
@include posix-functions/setgid.texi
@include posix-functions/setgrent.texi
@include posix-functions/sethostent.texi
@include posix-functions/setitimer.texi
@include posix-functions/setjmp.texi
@include posix-functions/setkey.texi
@include posix-functions/setlocale.texi
@include posix-functions/setlogmask.texi
@include posix-functions/setnetent.texi
@include posix-functions/setpayload.texi
@include posix-functions/setpayloadf.texi
@include posix-functions/setpayloadl.texi
@include posix-functions/setpayloadsig.texi
@include posix-functions/setpayloadsigf.texi
@include posix-functions/setpayloadsigl.texi
@include posix-functions/setpgid.texi
@include posix-functions/setpgrp.texi
@include posix-functions/setpriority.texi
@include posix-functions/setprotoent.texi
@include posix-functions/setpwent.texi
@include posix-functions/setregid.texi
@include posix-functions/setreuid.texi
@include posix-functions/setrlimit.texi
@include posix-functions/setservent.texi
@include posix-functions/setsid.texi
@include posix-functions/setsockopt.texi
@include posix-functions/setstate.texi
@include posix-functions/setuid.texi
@include posix-functions/setutxent.texi
@include posix-functions/setvbuf.texi
@include posix-functions/shm_open.texi
@include posix-functions/shm_unlink.texi
@include posix-functions/shmat.texi
@include posix-functions/shmctl.texi
@include posix-functions/shmdt.texi
@include posix-functions/shmget.texi
@include posix-functions/shutdown.texi
@include posix-functions/sigaction.texi
@include posix-functions/sigaddset.texi
@include posix-functions/sigaltstack.texi
@include posix-functions/sigdelset.texi
@include posix-functions/sigemptyset.texi
@include posix-functions/sigfillset.texi
@include posix-functions/sighold.texi
@include posix-functions/sigignore.texi
@include posix-functions/siginterrupt.texi
@include posix-functions/sigismember.texi
@include posix-functions/siglongjmp.texi
@include posix-functions/signal.texi
@include posix-functions/signbit.texi
@include posix-functions/signgam.texi
@include posix-functions/sigpause.texi
@include posix-functions/sigpending.texi
@include posix-functions/sigprocmask.texi
@include posix-functions/sigqueue.texi
@include posix-functions/sigrelse.texi
@include posix-functions/sigset.texi
@include posix-functions/sigsetjmp.texi
@include posix-functions/sigsuspend.texi
@include posix-functions/sigtimedwait.texi
@include posix-functions/sigwait.texi
@include posix-functions/sigwaitinfo.texi
@include posix-functions/sin.texi
@include posix-functions/sinf.texi
@include posix-functions/sinh.texi
@include posix-functions/sinhf.texi
@include posix-functions/sinhl.texi
@include posix-functions/sinl.texi
@include posix-functions/sleep.texi
@include posix-functions/snprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/sockatmark.texi
@include posix-functions/socket.texi
@include posix-functions/socketpair.texi
@include posix-functions/sprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/sqrt.texi
@include posix-functions/sqrtf.texi
@include posix-functions/sqrtl.texi
@include posix-functions/srand.texi
@include posix-functions/srand48.texi
@include posix-functions/srandom.texi
@include posix-functions/sscanf.texi
@include posix-functions/stat.texi
@include posix-functions/statvfs.texi
@include posix-functions/stderr.texi
@include posix-functions/stdin.texi
@include posix-functions/stdout.texi
@include posix-functions/stpcpy.texi
@include posix-functions/stpncpy.texi
@include posix-functions/strcasecmp.texi
@include posix-functions/strcasecmp_l.texi
@include posix-functions/strcat.texi
@include posix-functions/strchr.texi
@include posix-functions/strcmp.texi
@include posix-functions/strcoll.texi
@include posix-functions/strcoll_l.texi
@include posix-functions/strcpy.texi
@include posix-functions/strcspn.texi
@include posix-functions/strdup.texi
@include posix-functions/strerror.texi
@include posix-functions/strerror_l.texi
@include posix-functions/strerror_r.texi
@include posix-functions/strfmon.texi
@include posix-functions/strfmon_l.texi
@include posix-functions/strfromd.texi
@include posix-functions/strfromf.texi
@include posix-functions/strfroml.texi
@include posix-functions/strftime.texi
@include posix-functions/strftime_l.texi
@include posix-functions/strlen.texi
@include posix-functions/strncasecmp.texi
@include posix-functions/strncasecmp_l.texi
@include posix-functions/strncat.texi
@include posix-functions/strncmp.texi
@include posix-functions/strncpy.texi
@include posix-functions/strndup.texi
@include posix-functions/strnlen.texi
@include posix-functions/strpbrk.texi
@include posix-functions/strptime.texi
@include posix-functions/strrchr.texi
@include posix-functions/strsignal.texi
@include posix-functions/strspn.texi
@include posix-functions/strstr.texi
@include posix-functions/strtod.texi
@include posix-functions/strtof.texi
@include posix-functions/strtoimax.texi
@include posix-functions/strtok.texi
@include posix-functions/strtok_r.texi
@include posix-functions/strtol.texi
@include posix-functions/strtold.texi
@include posix-functions/strtoll.texi
@include posix-functions/strtoul.texi
@include posix-functions/strtoull.texi
@include posix-functions/strtoumax.texi
@include posix-functions/strxfrm.texi
@include posix-functions/strxfrm_l.texi
@include posix-functions/swab.texi
@include posix-functions/swprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/swscanf.texi
@include posix-functions/symlink.texi
@include posix-functions/symlinkat.texi
@include posix-functions/sync.texi
@include posix-functions/sysconf.texi
@include posix-functions/syslog.texi
@include posix-functions/system.texi
@include posix-functions/tan.texi
@include posix-functions/tanf.texi
@include posix-functions/tanh.texi
@include posix-functions/tanhf.texi
@include posix-functions/tanhl.texi
@include posix-functions/tanl.texi
@include posix-functions/tcdrain.texi
@include posix-functions/tcflow.texi
@include posix-functions/tcflush.texi
@include posix-functions/tcgetattr.texi
@include posix-functions/tcgetpgrp.texi
@include posix-functions/tcgetsid.texi
@include posix-functions/tcsendbreak.texi
@include posix-functions/tcsetattr.texi
@include posix-functions/tcsetpgrp.texi
@include posix-functions/tdelete.texi
@include posix-functions/telldir.texi
@include posix-functions/tempnam.texi
@include posix-functions/tfind.texi
@include posix-functions/tgamma.texi
@include posix-functions/tgammaf.texi
@include posix-functions/tgammal.texi
@include posix-functions/thrd_create.texi
@include posix-functions/thrd_current.texi
@include posix-functions/thrd_detach.texi
@include posix-functions/thrd_equal.texi
@include posix-functions/thrd_exit.texi
@include posix-functions/thrd_join.texi
@include posix-functions/thrd_sleep.texi
@include posix-functions/thrd_yield.texi
@include posix-functions/time.texi
@include posix-functions/timer_create.texi
@include posix-functions/timer_delete.texi
@include posix-functions/timer_getoverrun.texi
@include posix-functions/timer_gettime.texi
@include posix-functions/timer_settime.texi
@include posix-functions/times.texi
@include posix-functions/timespec_getres.texi
@include posix-functions/timezone.texi
@include posix-functions/tmpfile.texi
@include posix-functions/tmpnam.texi
@include posix-functions/toascii.texi
@include posix-functions/tolower.texi
@include posix-functions/tolower_l.texi
@include posix-functions/totalorder.texi
@include posix-functions/totalorderf.texi
@include posix-functions/totalorderl.texi
@include posix-functions/totalordermag.texi
@include posix-functions/totalordermagf.texi
@include posix-functions/totalordermagl.texi
@include posix-functions/toupper.texi
@include posix-functions/toupper_l.texi
@include posix-functions/towctrans.texi
@include posix-functions/towctrans_l.texi
@include posix-functions/towlower.texi
@include posix-functions/towlower_l.texi
@include posix-functions/towupper.texi
@include posix-functions/towupper_l.texi
@include posix-functions/trunc.texi
@include posix-functions/truncate.texi
@include posix-functions/truncf.texi
@include posix-functions/truncl.texi
@include posix-functions/tsearch.texi
@include posix-functions/tss_create.texi
@include posix-functions/tss_delete.texi
@include posix-functions/tss_get.texi
@include posix-functions/tss_set.texi
@include posix-functions/ttyname.texi
@include posix-functions/ttyname_r.texi
@include posix-functions/twalk.texi
@include posix-functions/tzname.texi
@include posix-functions/tzset.texi
@include posix-functions/ufromfp.texi
@include posix-functions/ufromfpf.texi
@include posix-functions/ufromfpl.texi
@include posix-functions/ufromfpx.texi
@include posix-functions/ufromfpxf.texi
@include posix-functions/ufromfpxl.texi
@include posix-functions/ulimit.texi
@include posix-functions/umask.texi
@include posix-functions/uname.texi
@include posix-functions/ungetc.texi
@include posix-functions/ungetwc.texi
@include posix-functions/unlink.texi
@include posix-functions/unlinkat.texi
@include posix-functions/unlockpt.texi
@include posix-functions/unsetenv.texi
@include posix-functions/uselocale.texi
@include posix-functions/utime.texi
@include posix-functions/utimensat.texi
@include posix-functions/utimes.texi
@include posix-functions/va_arg.texi
@include posix-functions/va_copy.texi
@include posix-functions/va_end.texi
@include posix-functions/va_start.texi
@include posix-functions/vdprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/vfprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/vfscanf.texi
@include posix-functions/vfwprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/vfwscanf.texi
@include posix-functions/vprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/vscanf.texi
@include posix-functions/vsnprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/vsprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/vsscanf.texi
@include posix-functions/vswprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/vswscanf.texi
@include posix-functions/vwprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/vwscanf.texi
@include posix-functions/wait.texi
@include posix-functions/waitid.texi
@include posix-functions/waitpid.texi
@include posix-functions/wcpcpy.texi
@include posix-functions/wcpncpy.texi
@include posix-functions/wcrtomb.texi
@include posix-functions/wcscasecmp.texi
@include posix-functions/wcscasecmp_l.texi
@include posix-functions/wcscat.texi
@include posix-functions/wcschr.texi
@include posix-functions/wcscmp.texi
@include posix-functions/wcscoll.texi
@include posix-functions/wcscoll_l.texi
@include posix-functions/wcscpy.texi
@include posix-functions/wcscspn.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsdup.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsftime.texi
@include posix-functions/wcslen.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsncasecmp.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsncasecmp_l.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsncat.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsncmp.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsncpy.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsnlen.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsnrtombs.texi
@include posix-functions/wcspbrk.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsrchr.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsrtombs.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsspn.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsstr.texi
@include posix-functions/wcstod.texi
@include posix-functions/wcstof.texi
@include posix-functions/wcstoimax.texi
@include posix-functions/wcstok.texi
@include posix-functions/wcstol.texi
@include posix-functions/wcstold.texi
@include posix-functions/wcstoll.texi
@include posix-functions/wcstombs.texi
@include posix-functions/wcstoul.texi
@include posix-functions/wcstoull.texi
@include posix-functions/wcstoumax.texi
@include posix-functions/wcswidth.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsxfrm.texi
@include posix-functions/wcsxfrm_l.texi
@include posix-functions/wctob.texi
@include posix-functions/wctomb.texi
@include posix-functions/wctrans.texi
@include posix-functions/wctrans_l.texi
@include posix-functions/wctype.texi
@include posix-functions/wctype_l.texi
@include posix-functions/wcwidth.texi
@include posix-functions/wmemchr.texi
@include posix-functions/wmemcmp.texi
@include posix-functions/wmemcpy.texi
@include posix-functions/wmemmove.texi
@include posix-functions/wmemset.texi
@include posix-functions/wordexp.texi
@include posix-functions/wordfree.texi
@include posix-functions/wprintf.texi
@include posix-functions/write.texi
@include posix-functions/writev.texi
@include posix-functions/wscanf.texi
@include posix-functions/y0.texi
@include posix-functions/y1.texi
@include posix-functions/yn.texi

@node Legacy Function Substitutes
@chapter Past POSIX Function Substitutes

This chapter describes which functions and function-like macros specified by
older versions of POSIX are substituted by Gnulib, which
portability pitfalls are fixed by Gnulib, and which (known) portability
problems are not worked around by Gnulib.

@nosuchmodulenote function

@menu
* bcmp::
* bcopy::
* bsd_signal::
* bzero::
* ecvt::
* fcvt::
* ftime::
* gcvt::
* getcontext::
* gethostbyaddr::
* gethostbyname::
* getwd::
* h_errno::
@ifhtml
* _index::
@end ifhtml
@ifnothtml
* index::
@end ifnothtml
* makecontext::
* mktemp::
* pthread_attr_getstackaddr::
* pthread_attr_setstackaddr::
* rindex::
* scalb::
* setcontext::
* swapcontext::
* ualarm::
* usleep::
* vfork::
* wcswcs::
@end menu

@include pastposix-functions/bcmp.texi
@include pastposix-functions/bcopy.texi
@include pastposix-functions/bsd_signal.texi
@include pastposix-functions/bzero.texi
@include pastposix-functions/ecvt.texi
@include pastposix-functions/fcvt.texi
@include pastposix-functions/ftime.texi
@include pastposix-functions/gcvt.texi
@include pastposix-functions/getcontext.texi
@include pastposix-functions/gethostbyaddr.texi
@include pastposix-functions/gethostbyname.texi
@include pastposix-functions/getwd.texi
@include pastposix-functions/h_errno.texi
@include pastposix-functions/index.texi
@include pastposix-functions/makecontext.texi
@include pastposix-functions/mktemp.texi
@include pastposix-functions/pthread_attr_getstackaddr.texi
@include pastposix-functions/pthread_attr_setstackaddr.texi
@include pastposix-functions/rindex.texi
@include pastposix-functions/scalb.texi
@include pastposix-functions/setcontext.texi
@include pastposix-functions/swapcontext.texi
@include pastposix-functions/ualarm.texi
@include pastposix-functions/usleep.texi
@include pastposix-functions/vfork.texi
@include pastposix-functions/wcswcs.texi

@node Glibc Header File Substitutes
@chapter Glibc Header File Substitutes

This chapter describes which header files contained in GNU libc but not
specified by ISO C or POSIX are substituted by Gnulib, which portability
pitfalls are fixed by Gnulib, and which (known) portability problems are
not worked around by Gnulib.

@nosuchmodulenote header file

@menu
* a.out.h::
* aliases.h::
* alloca.h::
* ar.h::
* argp.h::
* argz.h::
* byteswap.h::
* crypt.h::
* endian.h::
* envz.h::
* err.h::
* error.h::
* execinfo.h::
* fpu_control.h::
* fstab.h::
* fts.h::
* getopt.h::
* gshadow.h::
* ieee754.h::
* ifaddrs.h::
* libintl.h::
* link.h::
* malloc.h::
* mcheck.h::
* mntent.h::
* obstack.h::
* paths.h::
* printf.h::
* pty.h::
* resolv.h::
* shadow.h::
* sys/ioctl.h::
* sys/random.h::
* sysexits.h::
* ttyent.h::
@end menu

@include glibc-headers/a.out.texi
@include glibc-headers/aliases.texi
@include glibc-headers/alloca.texi
@include glibc-headers/ar.texi
@include glibc-headers/argp.texi
@include glibc-headers/argz.texi
@include glibc-headers/byteswap.texi
@include glibc-headers/crypt.texi
@include glibc-headers/endian.texi
@include glibc-headers/envz.texi
@include glibc-headers/err.texi
@include glibc-headers/error.texi
@include glibc-headers/execinfo.texi
@include glibc-headers/fpu_control.texi
@include glibc-headers/fstab.texi
@include glibc-headers/fts.texi
@include glibc-headers/getopt.texi
@include glibc-headers/gshadow.texi
@include glibc-headers/ieee754.texi
@include glibc-headers/ifaddrs.texi
@include glibc-headers/libintl.texi
@include glibc-headers/link.texi
@include glibc-headers/malloc.texi
@include glibc-headers/mcheck.texi
@include glibc-headers/mntent.texi
@include glibc-headers/obstack.texi
@include glibc-headers/paths.texi
@include glibc-headers/printf.texi
@include glibc-headers/pty.texi
@include glibc-headers/resolv.texi
@include glibc-headers/shadow.texi
@include glibc-headers/sys_ioctl.texi
@include glibc-headers/sys_random.texi
@include glibc-headers/sysexits.texi
@include glibc-headers/ttyent.texi

@node Glibc Function Substitutes
@chapter Glibc Function Substitutes

This chapter describes which functions and function-like macros
provided as extensions by at least GNU libc are also supported by Gnulib,
which portability pitfalls are fixed by Gnulib, and which (known)
portability problems are not worked around by Gnulib.

@nosuchmodulenote function

This list of functions is sorted according to the header that declares them.

@menu
* Glibc aio.h::
* Glibc aliases.h::
* Glibc argp.h::
* Glibc argz.h::
* Glibc arpa/inet.h::
* Glibc byteswap.h::
* Glibc complex.h::
* Glibc ctype.h::
* Glibc dirent.h::
* Glibc dlfcn.h::
* Glibc envz.h::
* Glibc err.h::
* Glibc errno.h::
* Glibc error.h::
* Glibc execinfo.h::
* Glibc fcntl.h::
* Glibc fenv.h::
* Glibc fmtmsg.h::
* Glibc fstab.h::
* Glibc fts.h::
* Glibc getopt.h::
* Glibc glob.h::
* Glibc gnu/libc-version.h::
* Glibc grp.h::
* Glibc gshadow.h::
* Glibc ifaddrs.h::
* Glibc libintl.h::
* Glibc link.h::
* Glibc malloc.h::
* Glibc math.h::
* Glibc mcheck.h::
* Glibc mntent.h::
* Glibc netdb.h::
* Glibc netinet/ether.h::
* Glibc netinet/in.h::
* Glibc obstack.h::
* Glibc poll.h::
* Glibc printf.h::
* Glibc pthread.h::
* Glibc pty.h::
* Glibc pwd.h::
* Glibc regex.h::
* Glibc regexp.h::
* Glibc resolv.h::
* Glibc rpc/auth.h::
* Glibc rpc/auth_des.h::
* Glibc rpc/auth_unix.h::
* Glibc rpc/clnt.h::
* Glibc rpc/key_prot.h::
* Glibc rpc/netdb.h::
* Glibc rpc/pmap_clnt.h::
* Glibc rpc/pmap_prot.h::
* Glibc rpc/pmap_rmt.h::
* Glibc rpc/rpc_msg.h::
* Glibc rpc/svc.h::
* Glibc rpc/xdr.h::
* Glibc rpcsvc/nislib.h::
* Glibc rpcsvc/nis_callback.h::
* Glibc rpcsvc/yp.h::
* Glibc rpcsvc/ypclnt.h::
* Glibc sched.h::
* Glibc search.h::
* Glibc selinux/selinux.h::
* Glibc semaphore.h::
* Glibc shadow.h::
* Glibc signal.h::
* Glibc spawn.h::
* Glibc stdio.h::
* Glibc stdlib.h::
* Glibc string.h::
* Glibc sys/auxv.h::
* Glibc sys/capability.h::
* Glibc sys/epoll.h::
* Glibc sys/eventfd.h::
* Glibc sys/fanotify.h::
* Glibc sys/file.h::
* Glibc sys/fsuid.h::
* Glibc sys/gmon.h::
* Glibc sys/inotify.h::
* Glibc sys/io.h and sys/perm.h::
* Glibc sys/kdaemon.h::
* Glibc sys/klog.h::
* Glibc sys/mman.h::
* Glibc sys/mount.h::
* Glibc sys/personality.h::
* Glibc sys/prctl.h::
* Glibc sys/profil.h::
* Glibc sys/ptrace.h::
* Glibc sys/quota.h::
* Glibc sys/random.h::
* Glibc sys/reboot.h::
* Glibc sys/resource.h::
* Glibc sys/sem.h::
* Glibc sys/sendfile.h::
* Glibc sys/signalfd.h::
* Glibc sys/single_threaded.h::
* Glibc sys/socket.h::
* Glibc sys/stat.h::
* Glibc sys/statfs.h::
* Glibc sys/swap.h::
* Glibc sys/sysctl.h::
* Glibc sys/sysinfo.h::
* Glibc sys/syslog.h::
* Glibc sys/sysmacros.h::
* Glibc sys/time.h::
* Glibc sys/timerfd.h::
* Glibc sys/timex.h::
* Glibc sys/uio.h::
* Glibc sys/ustat.h::
* Glibc sys/vlimit.h::
* Glibc sys/wait.h::
* Glibc sys/xattr.h::
* Glibc termios.h::
* Glibc time.h::
* Glibc ttyent.h::
* Glibc unistd.h::
* Glibc utmp.h::
* Glibc utmpx.h::
* Glibc wchar.h::
@end menu

@c @node Glibc a.out.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<a.out.h>}

@node Glibc aio.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<aio.h>}

@menu
* aio_init::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/aio_init.texi

@node Glibc aliases.h
@section Glibc @code{<aliases.h>}

@menu
* endaliasent::
* getaliasbyname::
* getaliasbyname_r::
* getaliasent::
* getaliasent_r::
* setaliasent::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/endaliasent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getaliasbyname.texi
@include glibc-functions/getaliasbyname_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getaliasent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getaliasent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/setaliasent.texi

@c @node Glibc alloca.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<alloca.h>}

@c @node Glibc ar.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<ar.h>}

@node Glibc argp.h
@section Glibc @code{<argp.h>}

@menu
* argp_err_exit_status::
* argp_error::
* argp_failure::
* argp_help::
* argp_parse::
* argp_program_bug_address::
* argp_program_version::
* argp_program_version_hook::
* argp_state_help::
* argp_usage::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/argp_err_exit_status.texi
@include glibc-functions/argp_error.texi
@include glibc-functions/argp_failure.texi
@include glibc-functions/argp_help.texi
@include glibc-functions/argp_parse.texi
@include glibc-functions/argp_program_bug_address.texi
@include glibc-functions/argp_program_version.texi
@include glibc-functions/argp_program_version_hook.texi
@include glibc-functions/argp_state_help.texi
@include glibc-functions/argp_usage.texi

@node Glibc argz.h
@section Glibc @code{<argz.h>}

@menu
* argz_add::
* argz_add_sep::
* argz_append::
* argz_count::
* argz_create::
* argz_create_sep::
* argz_delete::
* argz_extract::
* argz_insert::
* argz_next::
* argz_replace::
* argz_stringify::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/argz_add.texi
@include glibc-functions/argz_add_sep.texi
@include glibc-functions/argz_append.texi
@include glibc-functions/argz_count.texi
@include glibc-functions/argz_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/argz_create_sep.texi
@include glibc-functions/argz_delete.texi
@include glibc-functions/argz_extract.texi
@include glibc-functions/argz_insert.texi
@include glibc-functions/argz_next.texi
@include glibc-functions/argz_replace.texi
@include glibc-functions/argz_stringify.texi

@node Glibc arpa/inet.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<arpa/inet.h>}

@menu
* inet_aton::
* inet_lnaof::
* inet_makeaddr::
* inet_net_ntop::
* inet_net_pton::
* inet_netof::
* inet_network::
* inet_nsap_addr::
* inet_nsap_ntoa::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/inet_aton.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet_lnaof.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet_makeaddr.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet_net_ntop.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet_net_pton.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet_netof.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet_network.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet_nsap_addr.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet_nsap_ntoa.texi

@c @node Glibc assert.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<assert.h>}

@node Glibc byteswap.h
@section Glibc @code{<byteswap.h>}

@menu
* bswap_16::
* bswap_32::
* bswap_64::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/bswap_16.texi
@include glibc-functions/bswap_32.texi
@include glibc-functions/bswap_64.texi

@node Glibc complex.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<complex.h>}

@menu
* clog10::
* clog10f::
* clog10l::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/clog10.texi
@include glibc-functions/clog10f.texi
@include glibc-functions/clog10l.texi

@c @node Glibc cpio.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<cpio.h>}

@c @node Glibc crypt.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<crypt.h>}

@node Glibc ctype.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<ctype.h>}

@menu
* isctype::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/isctype.texi

@node Glibc dirent.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<dirent.h>}

@menu
* getdirentries::
* scandirat::
* versionsort::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/getdirentries.texi
@include glibc-functions/scandirat.texi
@include glibc-functions/versionsort.texi

@node Glibc dlfcn.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<dlfcn.h>}

@menu
* dladdr::
* dladdr1::
* dlinfo::
* dlmopen::
* dlvsym::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/dladdr.texi
@include glibc-functions/dladdr1.texi
@include glibc-functions/dlinfo.texi
@include glibc-functions/dlmopen.texi
@include glibc-functions/dlvsym.texi

@c @node Glibc endian.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<endian.h>}

@node Glibc envz.h
@section Glibc @code{<envz.h>}

@menu
* envz_add::
* envz_entry::
* envz_get::
* envz_merge::
* envz_remove::
* envz_strip::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/envz_add.texi
@include glibc-functions/envz_entry.texi
@include glibc-functions/envz_get.texi
@include glibc-functions/envz_merge.texi
@include glibc-functions/envz_remove.texi
@include glibc-functions/envz_strip.texi

@node Glibc err.h
@section Glibc @code{<err.h>}

@menu
* err::
* errx::
* verr::
* verrx::
* vwarn::
* vwarnx::
* warn::
* warnx::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/err.texi
@include glibc-functions/errx.texi
@include glibc-functions/verr.texi
@include glibc-functions/verrx.texi
@include glibc-functions/vwarn.texi
@include glibc-functions/vwarnx.texi
@include glibc-functions/warn.texi
@include glibc-functions/warnx.texi

@node Glibc errno.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<errno.h>}

@menu
* program_invocation_name::
* program_invocation_short_name::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/program_invocation_name.texi
@include glibc-functions/program_invocation_short_name.texi

@node Glibc error.h
@section Glibc @code{<error.h>}

@menu
* error::
* error_at_line::
* error_message_count::
* error_one_per_line::
* error_print_progname::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/error.texi
@include glibc-functions/error_at_line.texi
@include glibc-functions/error_message_count.texi
@include glibc-functions/error_one_per_line.texi
@include glibc-functions/error_print_progname.texi

@node Glibc execinfo.h
@section Glibc @code{<execinfo.h>}

@menu
* backtrace::
* backtrace_symbols::
* backtrace_symbols_fd::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/backtrace.texi
@include glibc-functions/backtrace_symbols.texi
@include glibc-functions/backtrace_symbols_fd.texi

@node Glibc fcntl.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<fcntl.h>}

@menu
* fallocate::
* name_to_handle_at::
* readahead::
* open_by_handle_at::
* sync_file_range::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/fallocate.texi
@include glibc-functions/name_to_handle_at.texi
@include glibc-functions/readahead.texi
@include glibc-functions/open_by_handle_at.texi
@include glibc-functions/sync_file_range.texi

@node Glibc fenv.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<fenv.h>}

@menu
* fedisableexcept::
* feenableexcept::
* fegetexcept::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/fedisableexcept.texi
@include glibc-functions/feenableexcept.texi
@include glibc-functions/fegetexcept.texi

@c @node Glibc float.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<float.h>}

@node Glibc fmtmsg.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<fmtmsg.h>}

@menu
* addseverity::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/addseverity.texi

@c @node Glibc fnmatch.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<fnmatch.h>}

@c @node Glibc fpu_control.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<fpu_control.h>}

@node Glibc fstab.h
@section Glibc @code{<fstab.h>}

@menu
* endfsent::
* getfsent::
* getfsfile::
* getfsspec::
* setfsent::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/endfsent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getfsent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getfsfile.texi
@include glibc-functions/getfsspec.texi
@include glibc-functions/setfsent.texi

@node Glibc fts.h
@section Glibc @code{<fts.h>}

@menu
* fts_children::
* fts_close::
* fts_open::
* fts_read::
* fts_set::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/fts_children.texi
@include glibc-functions/fts_close.texi
@include glibc-functions/fts_open.texi
@include glibc-functions/fts_read.texi
@include glibc-functions/fts_set.texi

@c @node Glibc ftw.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<ftw.h>}

@node Glibc getopt.h
@section Glibc @code{<getopt.h>}

@menu
* getopt_long::
* getopt_long_only::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/getopt_long.texi
@include glibc-functions/getopt_long_only.texi

@node Glibc glob.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<glob.h>}

@menu
* glob_pattern_p::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/glob_pattern_p.texi

@node Glibc gnu/libc-version.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<gnu/libc-version.h>}

@menu
* gnu_get_libc_release::
* gnu_get_libc_version::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/gnu_get_libc_release.texi
@include glibc-functions/gnu_get_libc_version.texi

@node Glibc grp.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<grp.h>}

@menu
* fgetgrent::
* fgetgrent_r::
* getgrent_r::
* getgrouplist::
* initgroups::
* putgrent::
* setgroups::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/fgetgrent.texi
@include glibc-functions/fgetgrent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getgrent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getgrouplist.texi
@include glibc-functions/initgroups.texi
@include glibc-functions/putgrent.texi
@include glibc-functions/setgroups.texi

@node Glibc gshadow.h
@section Glibc @code{<gshadow.h>}

@menu
* endsgent::
* fgetsgent::
* fgetsgent_r::
* getsgent::
* getsgent_r::
* getsgnam::
* getsgnam_r::
* putsgent::
* setsgent::
* sgetsgent::
* sgetsgent_r::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/endsgent.texi
@include glibc-functions/fgetsgent.texi
@include glibc-functions/fgetsgent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getsgent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getsgent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getsgnam.texi
@include glibc-functions/getsgnam_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/putsgent.texi
@include glibc-functions/setsgent.texi
@include glibc-functions/sgetsgent.texi
@include glibc-functions/sgetsgent_r.texi

@c @node Glibc iconv.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<iconv.h>}

@c @node Glibc ieee754.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<ieee754.h>}

@node Glibc ifaddrs.h
@section Glibc @code{<ifaddrs.h>}

@menu
* getifaddrs::
* freeifaddrs::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/getifaddrs.texi
@include glibc-functions/freeifaddrs.texi

@c @node Glibc inttypes.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<inttypes.h>}

@c @node Glibc iso646.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<iso646.h>}

@c @node Glibc langinfo.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<langinfo.h>}

@c @node Glibc libgen.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<libgen.h>}

@node Glibc libintl.h
@section Glibc @code{<libintl.h>}

@menu
* bind_textdomain_codeset::
* bindtextdomain::
* dcgettext::
* dcngettext::
* dgettext::
* dngettext::
* gettext::
* ngettext::
* textdomain::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/bind_textdomain_codeset.texi
@include glibc-functions/bindtextdomain.texi
@include glibc-functions/dcgettext.texi
@include glibc-functions/dcngettext.texi
@include glibc-functions/dgettext.texi
@include glibc-functions/dngettext.texi
@include glibc-functions/gettext.texi
@include glibc-functions/ngettext.texi
@include glibc-functions/textdomain.texi

@c @node Glibc limits.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<limits.h>}

@node Glibc link.h
@section Glibc @code{<link.h>}

@menu
* dl_iterate_phdr::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/dl_iterate_phdr.texi

@c @node Glibc locale.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<locale.h>}

@node Glibc malloc.h
@section Glibc @code{<malloc.h>}

@menu
* mallinfo::
* mallinfo2::
* malloc_info::
* malloc_stats::
* malloc_trim::
* malloc_usable_size::
* mallopt::
* memalign::
* pvalloc::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/mallinfo.texi
@include glibc-functions/mallinfo2.texi
@include glibc-functions/malloc_info.texi
@include glibc-functions/malloc_stats.texi
@include glibc-functions/malloc_trim.texi
@include glibc-functions/malloc_usable_size.texi
@include glibc-functions/mallopt.texi
@include glibc-functions/memalign.texi
@include glibc-functions/pvalloc.texi

@node Glibc math.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<math.h>}

@menu
* drem::
* dremf::
* dreml::
* exp10::
* exp10f::
* exp10l::
* finite::
* finitef::
* finitel::
* gamma::
* gammaf::
* gammal::
* isinff::
* isinfl::
* isnanf::
* isnanl::
* j0f::
* j0l::
* j1f::
* j1l::
* jnf::
* jnl::
* lgamma_r::
* lgammaf_r::
* lgammal_r::
* matherr::
* pow10::
* pow10f::
* pow10l::
* scalbf::
* scalbl::
* significand::
* significandf::
* significandl::
* sincos::
* sincosf::
* sincosl::
* y0f::
* y0l::
* y1f::
* y1l::
* ynf::
* ynl::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/drem.texi
@include glibc-functions/dremf.texi
@include glibc-functions/dreml.texi
@include glibc-functions/exp10.texi
@include glibc-functions/exp10f.texi
@include glibc-functions/exp10l.texi
@include glibc-functions/finite.texi
@include glibc-functions/finitef.texi
@include glibc-functions/finitel.texi
@include glibc-functions/gamma.texi
@include glibc-functions/gammaf.texi
@include glibc-functions/gammal.texi
@include glibc-functions/isinff.texi
@include glibc-functions/isinfl.texi
@include glibc-functions/isnanf.texi
@include glibc-functions/isnanl.texi
@include glibc-functions/j0f.texi
@include glibc-functions/j0l.texi
@include glibc-functions/j1f.texi
@include glibc-functions/j1l.texi
@include glibc-functions/jnf.texi
@include glibc-functions/jnl.texi
@include glibc-functions/lgamma_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/lgammaf_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/lgammal_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/matherr.texi
@include glibc-functions/pow10.texi
@include glibc-functions/pow10f.texi
@include glibc-functions/pow10l.texi
@include glibc-functions/scalbf.texi
@include glibc-functions/scalbl.texi
@include glibc-functions/significand.texi
@include glibc-functions/significandf.texi
@include glibc-functions/significandl.texi
@include glibc-functions/sincos.texi
@include glibc-functions/sincosf.texi
@include glibc-functions/sincosl.texi
@include glibc-functions/y0f.texi
@include glibc-functions/y0l.texi
@include glibc-functions/y1f.texi
@include glibc-functions/y1l.texi
@include glibc-functions/ynf.texi
@include glibc-functions/ynl.texi

@node Glibc mcheck.h
@section Glibc @code{<mcheck.h>}

@menu
* mcheck::
* mcheck_check_all::
* mcheck_pedantic::
* mprobe::
* mtrace::
* muntrace::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/mcheck.texi
@include glibc-functions/mcheck_check_all.texi
@include glibc-functions/mcheck_pedantic.texi
@include glibc-functions/mprobe.texi
@include glibc-functions/mtrace.texi
@include glibc-functions/muntrace.texi

@c @node Glibc monetary.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<monetary.h>}

@node Glibc mntent.h
@section Glibc @code{<mntent.h>}

@menu
* addmntent::
* endmntent::
* getmntent::
* getmntent_r::
* hasmntopt::
* setmntent::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/addmntent.texi
@include glibc-functions/endmntent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getmntent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getmntent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/hasmntopt.texi
@include glibc-functions/setmntent.texi

@c @node Glibc mqueue.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<mqueue.h>}

@c @node Glibc ndbm.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<ndbm.h>}

@node Glibc netdb.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<netdb.h>}

@menu
* endnetgrent::
* gethostbyaddr_r::
* gethostbyname2::
* gethostbyname2_r::
* gethostbyname_r::
* gethostent_r::
* getnetbyaddr_r::
* getnetbyname_r::
* getnetent_r::
* getnetgrent::
* getnetgrent_r::
* getprotobyname_r::
* getprotobynumber_r::
* getprotoent_r::
* getservbyname_r::
* getservbyport_r::
* getservent_r::
* herror::
* hstrerror::
* innetgr::
* rcmd::
* rcmd_af::
* rexec::
* rexec_af::
* rresvport::
* rresvport_af::
* ruserok::
* ruserok_af::
* setnetgrent::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/endnetgrent.texi
@include glibc-functions/gethostbyaddr_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/gethostbyname2.texi
@include glibc-functions/gethostbyname2_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/gethostbyname_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/gethostent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getnetbyaddr_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getnetbyname_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getnetent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getnetgrent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getnetgrent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getprotobyname_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getprotobynumber_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getprotoent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getservbyname_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getservbyport_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getservent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/herror.texi
@include glibc-functions/hstrerror.texi
@include glibc-functions/innetgr.texi
@include glibc-functions/rcmd.texi
@include glibc-functions/rcmd_af.texi
@include glibc-functions/rexec.texi
@include glibc-functions/rexec_af.texi
@include glibc-functions/rresvport.texi
@include glibc-functions/rresvport_af.texi
@include glibc-functions/ruserok.texi
@include glibc-functions/ruserok_af.texi
@include glibc-functions/setnetgrent.texi

@node Glibc netinet/ether.h
@section Glibc @code{<netinet/ether.h>}

@menu
* ether_aton::
* ether_aton_r::
* ether_hostton::
* ether_line::
* ether_ntoa::
* ether_ntoa_r::
* ether_ntohost::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/ether_aton.texi
@include glibc-functions/ether_aton_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/ether_hostton.texi
@include glibc-functions/ether_line.texi
@include glibc-functions/ether_ntoa.texi
@include glibc-functions/ether_ntoa_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/ether_ntohost.texi

@node Glibc netinet/in.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<netinet/in.h>}

@menu
* bindresvport::
* getipv4sourcefilter::
* getsourcefilter::
* in6addr_any::
* in6addr_loopback::
* inet6_option_alloc::
* inet6_option_append::
* inet6_option_find::
* inet6_option_init::
* inet6_option_next::
* inet6_option_space::
* inet6_opt_append::
* inet6_opt_find::
* inet6_opt_finish::
* inet6_opt_get_val::
* inet6_opt_init::
* inet6_opt_next::
* inet6_opt_set_val::
* inet6_rth_add::
* inet6_rth_getaddr::
* inet6_rth_init::
* inet6_rth_reverse::
* inet6_rth_segments::
* inet6_rth_space::
* setipv4sourcefilter::
* setsourcefilter::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/bindresvport.texi
@include glibc-functions/getipv4sourcefilter.texi
@include glibc-functions/getsourcefilter.texi
@include glibc-functions/in6addr_any.texi
@include glibc-functions/in6addr_loopback.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_option_alloc.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_option_append.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_option_find.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_option_init.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_option_next.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_option_space.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_opt_append.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_opt_find.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_opt_finish.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_opt_get_val.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_opt_init.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_opt_next.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_opt_set_val.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_rth_add.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_rth_getaddr.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_rth_init.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_rth_reverse.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_rth_segments.texi
@include glibc-functions/inet6_rth_space.texi
@include glibc-functions/setipv4sourcefilter.texi
@include glibc-functions/setsourcefilter.texi

@c @node Glibc nl_types.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<nl_types.h>}

@node Glibc obstack.h
@section Glibc @code{<obstack.h>}

@menu
* obstack_alloc_failed_handler::
* obstack_exit_failure::
* obstack_free::
* obstack_printf::
* obstack_vprintf::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/obstack_alloc_failed_handler.texi
@include glibc-functions/obstack_exit_failure.texi
@include glibc-functions/obstack_free.texi
@include glibc-functions/obstack_printf.texi
@include glibc-functions/obstack_vprintf.texi

@c @node Glibc paths.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<paths.h>}

@node Glibc poll.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<poll.h>}

@menu
* ppoll::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/ppoll.texi

@node Glibc printf.h
@section Glibc @code{<printf.h>}

@menu
* parse_printf_format::
* printf_size::
* printf_size_info::
* register_printf_function::
* register_printf_modifier::
* register_printf_specifier::
* register_printf_type::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/parse_printf_format.texi
@include glibc-functions/printf_size.texi
@include glibc-functions/printf_size_info.texi
@include glibc-functions/register_printf_function.texi
@include glibc-functions/register_printf_modifier.texi
@include glibc-functions/register_printf_specifier.texi
@include glibc-functions/register_printf_type.texi

@node Glibc pthread.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<pthread.h>}

@menu
* pthread_attr_getaffinity_np::
* pthread_attr_setaffinity_np::
* pthread_attr_getsigmask_np::
* pthread_attr_setsigmask_np::
* pthread_clockjoin_np::
* pthread_cond_clockwait::
* pthread_getaffinity_np::
* pthread_getattr_default_np::
* pthread_getattr_np::
* pthread_getname_np::
* pthread_kill_other_threads_np::
* pthread_mutex_clocklock::
* pthread_rwlock_clockrdlock::
* pthread_rwlock_clockwrlock::
* pthread_rwlockattr_getkind_np::
* pthread_rwlockattr_setkind_np::
* pthread_setaffinity_np::
* pthread_setattr_default_np::
* pthread_setname_np::
* pthread_sigqueue::
* pthread_timedjoin_np::
* pthread_tryjoin_np::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/pthread_attr_getaffinity_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_attr_setaffinity_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_attr_getsigmask_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_attr_setsigmask_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_clockjoin_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_cond_clockwait.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_getaffinity_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_getattr_default_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_getattr_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_getname_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_kill_other_threads_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_mutex_clocklock.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_rwlock_clockrdlock.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_rwlock_clockwrlock.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_rwlockattr_getkind_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_rwlockattr_setkind_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_setaffinity_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_setattr_default_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_setname_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_sigqueue.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_timedjoin_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/pthread_tryjoin_np.texi

@node Glibc pty.h
@section Glibc @code{<pty.h>}

@menu
* forkpty::
* openpty::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/forkpty.texi
@include glibc-functions/openpty.texi

@node Glibc pwd.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<pwd.h>}

@menu
* fgetpwent::
* fgetpwent_r::
* getpw::
* getpwent_r::
* putpwent::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/fgetpwent.texi
@include glibc-functions/fgetpwent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getpw.texi
@include glibc-functions/getpwent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/putpwent.texi

@node Glibc regex.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<regex.h>}

@menu
* re_comp::
* re_compile_fastmap::
* re_compile_pattern::
* re_exec::
* re_match::
* re_match_2::
* re_search::
* re_search_2::
* re_set_registers::
* re_set_syntax::
* re_syntax_options::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/re_comp.texi
@include glibc-functions/re_compile_fastmap.texi
@include glibc-functions/re_compile_pattern.texi
@include glibc-functions/re_exec.texi
@include glibc-functions/re_match.texi
@include glibc-functions/re_match_2.texi
@include glibc-functions/re_search.texi
@include glibc-functions/re_search_2.texi
@include glibc-functions/re_set_registers.texi
@include glibc-functions/re_set_syntax.texi
@include glibc-functions/re_syntax_options.texi

@node Glibc regexp.h
@section Glibc @code{<regexp.h>}

@menu
* advance::
* loc1::
* loc2::
* locs::
* step::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/advance.texi
@include glibc-functions/loc1.texi
@include glibc-functions/loc2.texi
@include glibc-functions/locs.texi
@include glibc-functions/step.texi

@node Glibc resolv.h
@section Glibc @code{<resolv.h>}

@menu
* dn_comp::
* dn_expand::
* dn_skipname::
* res_dnok::
* res_hnok::
* res_init::
* res_mailok::
* res_mkquery::
* res_nmkquery::
* res_nquery::
* res_nquerydomain::
* res_nsearch::
* res_nsend::
* res_ownok::
* res_query::
* res_querydomain::
* res_search::
* res_send::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/dn_comp.texi
@include glibc-functions/dn_expand.texi
@include glibc-functions/dn_skipname.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_dnok.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_hnok.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_init.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_mailok.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_mkquery.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_nmkquery.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_nquery.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_nquerydomain.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_nsearch.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_nsend.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_ownok.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_query.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_querydomain.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_search.texi
@include glibc-functions/res_send.texi

@node Glibc rpc/auth.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpc/auth.h>}

@menu
* authdes_create::
* authdes_pk_create::
* authnone_create::
* authunix_create::
* authunix_create_default::
* getnetname::
* host2netname::
* key_decryptsession::
* key_decryptsession_pk::
* key_encryptsession::
* key_encryptsession_pk::
* key_gendes::
* key_get_conv::
* key_secretkey_is_set::
* key_setsecret::
* netname2host::
* netname2user::
* user2netname::
* xdr_des_block::
* xdr_opaque_auth::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/authdes_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/authdes_pk_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/authnone_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/authunix_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/authunix_create_default.texi
@include glibc-functions/getnetname.texi
@include glibc-functions/host2netname.texi
@include glibc-functions/key_decryptsession.texi
@include glibc-functions/key_decryptsession_pk.texi
@include glibc-functions/key_encryptsession.texi
@include glibc-functions/key_encryptsession_pk.texi
@include glibc-functions/key_gendes.texi
@include glibc-functions/key_get_conv.texi
@include glibc-functions/key_secretkey_is_set.texi
@include glibc-functions/key_setsecret.texi
@include glibc-functions/netname2host.texi
@include glibc-functions/netname2user.texi
@include glibc-functions/user2netname.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_des_block.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_opaque_auth.texi

@node Glibc rpc/auth_des.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpc/auth_des.h>}

@menu
* authdes_getucred::
* getpublickey::
* getsecretkey::
* rtime::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/authdes_getucred.texi
@include glibc-functions/getpublickey.texi
@include glibc-functions/getsecretkey.texi
@include glibc-functions/rtime.texi

@node Glibc rpc/auth_unix.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpc/auth_unix.h>}

@menu
* xdr_authunix_parms::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/xdr_authunix_parms.texi

@node Glibc rpc/clnt.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpc/clnt.h>}

@menu
* callrpc::
* clnt_create::
* clnt_pcreateerror::
* clnt_perrno::
* clnt_perror::
* clnt_spcreateerror::
* clnt_sperrno::
* clnt_sperror::
* clntraw_create::
* clnttcp_create::
* clntudp_bufcreate::
* clntudp_create::
* clntunix_create::
* get_myaddress::
* getrpcport::
* rpc_createerr::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/callrpc.texi
@include glibc-functions/clnt_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/clnt_pcreateerror.texi
@include glibc-functions/clnt_perrno.texi
@include glibc-functions/clnt_perror.texi
@include glibc-functions/clnt_spcreateerror.texi
@include glibc-functions/clnt_sperrno.texi
@include glibc-functions/clnt_sperror.texi
@include glibc-functions/clntraw_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/clnttcp_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/clntudp_bufcreate.texi
@include glibc-functions/clntudp_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/clntunix_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/get_myaddress.texi
@include glibc-functions/getrpcport.texi
@include glibc-functions/rpc_createerr.texi

@c @node Glibc rpc/des_crypt.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<rpc/des_crypt.h>}

@node Glibc rpc/key_prot.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpc/key_prot.h>}

@menu
* xdr_cryptkeyarg::
* xdr_cryptkeyarg2::
* xdr_cryptkeyres::
* xdr_getcredres::
* xdr_key_netstarg::
* xdr_key_netstres::
* xdr_keybuf::
* xdr_keystatus::
* xdr_netnamestr::
* xdr_unixcred::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/xdr_cryptkeyarg.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_cryptkeyarg2.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_cryptkeyres.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_getcredres.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_key_netstarg.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_key_netstres.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_keybuf.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_keystatus.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_netnamestr.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_unixcred.texi

@node Glibc rpc/netdb.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpc/netdb.h>}

@menu
* endrpcent::
* getrpcbyname::
* getrpcbyname_r::
* getrpcbynumber::
* getrpcbynumber_r::
* getrpcent::
* getrpcent_r::
* setrpcent::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/endrpcent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getrpcbyname.texi
@include glibc-functions/getrpcbyname_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getrpcbynumber.texi
@include glibc-functions/getrpcbynumber_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getrpcent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getrpcent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/setrpcent.texi

@node Glibc rpc/pmap_clnt.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpc/pmap_clnt.h>}

@menu
* clnt_broadcast::
* pmap_getmaps::
* pmap_getport::
* pmap_rmtcall::
* pmap_set::
* pmap_unset::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/clnt_broadcast.texi
@include glibc-functions/pmap_getmaps.texi
@include glibc-functions/pmap_getport.texi
@include glibc-functions/pmap_rmtcall.texi
@include glibc-functions/pmap_set.texi
@include glibc-functions/pmap_unset.texi

@node Glibc rpc/pmap_prot.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpc/pmap_prot.h>}

@menu
* xdr_pmap::
* xdr_pmaplist::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/xdr_pmap.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_pmaplist.texi

@node Glibc rpc/pmap_rmt.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpc/pmap_rmt.h>}

@menu
* xdr_rmtcall_args::
* xdr_rmtcallres::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/xdr_rmtcall_args.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_rmtcallres.texi

@node Glibc rpc/rpc_msg.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpc/rpc_msg.h>}

@menu
* xdr_callhdr::
* xdr_callmsg::
* xdr_replymsg::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/xdr_callhdr.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_callmsg.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_replymsg.texi

@node Glibc rpc/svc.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpc/svc.h>}

@menu
* svc_exit::
* svc_fdset::
* svc_getreq::
* svc_getreq_common::
* svc_getreq_poll::
* svc_getreqset::
* svc_max_pollfd::
* svc_pollfd::
* svc_register::
* svc_run::
* svc_sendreply::
* svc_unregister::
* svcerr_auth::
* svcerr_decode::
* svcerr_noproc::
* svcerr_noprog::
* svcerr_progvers::
* svcerr_systemerr::
* svcerr_weakauth::
* svcraw_create::
* svctcp_create::
* svcudp_bufcreate::
* svcudp_create::
* svcunix_create::
* xprt_register::
* xprt_unregister::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/svc_exit.texi
@include glibc-functions/svc_fdset.texi
@include glibc-functions/svc_getreq.texi
@include glibc-functions/svc_getreq_common.texi
@include glibc-functions/svc_getreq_poll.texi
@include glibc-functions/svc_getreqset.texi
@include glibc-functions/svc_max_pollfd.texi
@include glibc-functions/svc_pollfd.texi
@include glibc-functions/svc_register.texi
@include glibc-functions/svc_run.texi
@include glibc-functions/svc_sendreply.texi
@include glibc-functions/svc_unregister.texi
@include glibc-functions/svcerr_auth.texi
@include glibc-functions/svcerr_decode.texi
@include glibc-functions/svcerr_noproc.texi
@include glibc-functions/svcerr_noprog.texi
@include glibc-functions/svcerr_progvers.texi
@include glibc-functions/svcerr_systemerr.texi
@include glibc-functions/svcerr_weakauth.texi
@include glibc-functions/svcraw_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/svctcp_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/svcudp_bufcreate.texi
@include glibc-functions/svcudp_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/svcunix_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/xprt_register.texi
@include glibc-functions/xprt_unregister.texi

@node Glibc rpc/xdr.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpc/xdr.h>}

@menu
* xdr_array::
* xdr_bool::
* xdr_bytes::
* xdr_char::
* xdr_double::
* xdr_enum::
* xdr_float::
* xdr_free::
* xdr_hyper::
* xdr_int::
* xdr_int16_t::
* xdr_int32_t::
* xdr_int64_t::
* xdr_int8_t::
* xdr_long::
* xdr_longlong_t::
* xdr_netobj::
* xdr_opaque::
* xdr_pointer::
* xdr_quad_t::
* xdr_reference::
* xdr_short::
* xdr_sizeof::
* xdr_string::
* xdr_u_char::
* xdr_u_hyper::
* xdr_u_int::
* xdr_u_long::
* xdr_u_longlong_t::
* xdr_u_quad_t::
* xdr_u_short::
* xdr_uint16_t::
* xdr_uint32_t::
* xdr_uint64_t::
* xdr_uint8_t::
* xdr_union::
* xdr_vector::
* xdr_void::
* xdr_wrapstring::
* xdrmem_create::
* xdrrec_create::
* xdrrec_endofrecord::
* xdrrec_eof::
* xdrrec_skiprecord::
* xdrstdio_create::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/xdr_array.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_bool.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_bytes.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_char.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_double.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_enum.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_float.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_free.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_hyper.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_int.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_int16_t.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_int32_t.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_int64_t.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_int8_t.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_long.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_longlong_t.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_netobj.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_opaque.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_pointer.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_quad_t.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_reference.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_short.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_sizeof.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_string.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_u_char.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_u_hyper.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_u_int.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_u_long.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_u_longlong_t.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_u_quad_t.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_u_short.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_uint16_t.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_uint32_t.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_uint64_t.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_uint8_t.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_union.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_vector.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_void.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_wrapstring.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdrmem_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdrrec_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdrrec_endofrecord.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdrrec_eof.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdrrec_skiprecord.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdrstdio_create.texi

@node Glibc rpcsvc/nislib.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpcsvc/nislib.h>}

@menu
* nis_add::
* nis_add_entry::
* nis_addmember::
* nis_checkpoint::
* nis_clone_object::
* nis_creategroup::
* nis_destroy_object::
* nis_destroygroup::
* nis_dir_cmp::
* nis_domain_of::
* nis_domain_of_r::
* nis_first_entry::
* nis_freenames::
* nis_freeresult::
* nis_freeservlist::
* nis_freetags::
* nis_getnames::
* nis_getservlist::
* nis_ismember::
* nis_leaf_of::
* nis_leaf_of_r::
* nis_lerror::
* nis_list::
* nis_local_directory::
* nis_local_group::
* nis_local_host::
* nis_local_principal::
* nis_lookup::
* nis_mkdir::
* nis_modify::
* nis_modify_entry::
* nis_name_of::
* nis_name_of_r::
* nis_next_entry::
* nis_perror::
* nis_ping::
* nis_print_directory::
* nis_print_entry::
* nis_print_group::
* nis_print_group_entry::
* nis_print_link::
* nis_print_object::
* nis_print_result::
* nis_print_rights::
* nis_print_table::
* nis_remove::
* nis_remove_entry::
* nis_removemember::
* nis_rmdir::
* nis_servstate::
* nis_sperrno::
* nis_sperror::
* nis_sperror_r::
* nis_stats::
* nis_verifygroup::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/nis_add.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_add_entry.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_addmember.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_checkpoint.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_clone_object.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_creategroup.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_destroy_object.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_destroygroup.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_dir_cmp.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_domain_of.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_domain_of_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_first_entry.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_freenames.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_freeresult.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_freeservlist.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_freetags.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_getnames.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_getservlist.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_ismember.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_leaf_of.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_leaf_of_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_lerror.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_list.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_local_directory.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_local_group.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_local_host.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_local_principal.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_lookup.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_mkdir.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_modify.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_modify_entry.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_name_of.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_name_of_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_next_entry.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_perror.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_ping.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_print_directory.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_print_entry.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_print_group.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_print_group_entry.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_print_link.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_print_object.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_print_result.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_print_rights.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_print_table.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_remove.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_remove_entry.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_removemember.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_rmdir.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_servstate.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_sperrno.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_sperror.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_sperror_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_stats.texi
@include glibc-functions/nis_verifygroup.texi

@node Glibc rpcsvc/nis_callback.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpcsvc/nis_callback.h>}

@menu
* xdr_cback_data::
* xdr_obj_p::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/xdr_cback_data.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_obj_p.texi

@node Glibc rpcsvc/yp.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpcsvc/yp.h>}

@menu
* xdr_domainname::
* xdr_keydat::
* xdr_valdat::
* xdr_ypbind_resptype::
* xdr_ypmap_parms::
* xdr_ypmaplist::
* xdr_yppushresp_xfr::
* xdr_ypreq_key::
* xdr_ypreq_nokey::
* xdr_ypreq_xfr::
* xdr_ypresp_all::
* xdr_ypresp_key_val::
* xdr_ypresp_maplist::
* xdr_ypresp_master::
* xdr_ypresp_order::
* xdr_ypresp_val::
* xdr_ypresp_xfr::
* xdr_ypstat::
* xdr_ypxfrstat::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/xdr_domainname.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_keydat.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_valdat.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypbind_resptype.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypmap_parms.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypmaplist.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_yppushresp_xfr.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypreq_key.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypreq_nokey.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypreq_xfr.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypresp_all.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypresp_key_val.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypresp_maplist.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypresp_master.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypresp_order.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypresp_val.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypresp_xfr.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypstat.texi
@include glibc-functions/xdr_ypxfrstat.texi

@c @node Glibc rpcsvc/yp_prot.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<rpcsvc/yp_prot.h>}

@node Glibc rpcsvc/ypclnt.h
@section Glibc @code{<rpcsvc/ypclnt.h>}

@menu
* yp_all::
* yp_bind::
* yp_first::
* yp_get_default_domain::
* yp_master::
* yp_match::
* yp_next::
* yp_order::
* yp_unbind::
* ypbinderr_string::
* yperr_string::
* ypprot_err::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/yp_all.texi
@include glibc-functions/yp_bind.texi
@include glibc-functions/yp_first.texi
@include glibc-functions/yp_get_default_domain.texi
@include glibc-functions/yp_master.texi
@include glibc-functions/yp_match.texi
@include glibc-functions/yp_next.texi
@include glibc-functions/yp_order.texi
@include glibc-functions/yp_unbind.texi
@include glibc-functions/ypbinderr_string.texi
@include glibc-functions/yperr_string.texi
@include glibc-functions/ypprot_err.texi

@c @node Glibc rpcsvc/ypupd.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<rpcsvc/ypupd.h>}

@node Glibc sched.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sched.h>}

@menu
* clone::
* getcpu::
* sched_getaffinity::
* sched_getcpu::
* sched_setaffinity::
* setns::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/clone.texi
@include glibc-functions/getcpu.texi
@include glibc-functions/sched_getaffinity.texi
@include glibc-functions/sched_getcpu.texi
@include glibc-functions/sched_setaffinity.texi
@include glibc-functions/setns.texi

@node Glibc search.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<search.h>}

@menu
* hcreate_r::
* hdestroy_r::
* hsearch_r::
* tdestroy::
* twalk_r::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/hcreate_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/hdestroy_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/hsearch_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/tdestroy.texi
@include glibc-functions/twalk_r.texi

@node Glibc selinux/selinux.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<selinux/selinux.h>}

@menu
* fgetfilecon::
* getfilecon::
* lgetfilecon::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/getfilecon-desc.texi
@include glibc-functions/fgetfilecon.texi
@include glibc-functions/getfilecon.texi
@include glibc-functions/lgetfilecon.texi

@node Glibc semaphore.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<semaphore.h>}

@menu
* sem_clockwait::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/sem_clockwait.texi

@c @node Glibc setjmp.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<setjmp.h>}

@node Glibc shadow.h
@section Glibc @code{<shadow.h>}

@menu
* endspent::
* fgetspent::
* fgetspent_r::
* getspent::
* getspent_r::
* getspnam::
* getspnam_r::
* lckpwdf::
* putspent::
* setspent::
* sgetspent::
* sgetspent_r::
* ulckpwdf::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/endspent.texi
@include glibc-functions/fgetspent.texi
@include glibc-functions/fgetspent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getspent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getspent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getspnam.texi
@include glibc-functions/getspnam_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/lckpwdf.texi
@include glibc-functions/putspent.texi
@include glibc-functions/setspent.texi
@include glibc-functions/sgetspent.texi
@include glibc-functions/sgetspent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/ulckpwdf.texi

@node Glibc signal.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<signal.h>}

@menu
* gsignal::
* sigandset::
* sigblock::
* siggetmask::
* sigisemptyset::
* sigorset::
* sigreturn::
* sigsetmask::
* sigstack::
* sigvec::
* ssignal::
* sys_siglist::
* sysv_signal::
* tgkill::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/gsignal.texi
@include glibc-functions/sigandset.texi
@include glibc-functions/sigblock.texi
@include glibc-functions/siggetmask.texi
@include glibc-functions/sigisemptyset.texi
@include glibc-functions/sigorset.texi
@include glibc-functions/sigreturn.texi
@include glibc-functions/sigsetmask.texi
@include glibc-functions/sigstack.texi
@include glibc-functions/sigvec.texi
@include glibc-functions/ssignal.texi
@include glibc-functions/sys_siglist.texi
@include glibc-functions/sysv_signal.texi
@include glibc-functions/tgkill.texi

@node Glibc spawn.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<spawn.h>}

@menu
* posix_spawn_file_actions_addchdir_np::
* posix_spawn_file_actions_addclosefrom_np::
* posix_spawn_file_actions_addfchdir_np::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/posix_spawn_file_actions_addchdir_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/posix_spawn_file_actions_addclosefrom_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/posix_spawn_file_actions_addfchdir_np.texi

@c @node Glibc stdarg.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<stdarg.h>}

@c @node Glibc stdbool.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<stdbool.h>}

@c @node Glibc stddef.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<stddef.h>}

@c @node Glibc stdint.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<stdint.h>}

@node Glibc stdio.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<stdio.h>}

@menu
* asprintf::
* cuserid::
* clearerr_unlocked::
* fcloseall::
* feof_unlocked::
* ferror_unlocked::
* fflush_unlocked::
* fgetc_unlocked::
* fgets_unlocked::
* fileno_unlocked::
* fopencookie::
* fputc_unlocked::
* fputs_unlocked::
* fread_unlocked::
* fwrite_unlocked::
* getw::
* putw::
* renameat2::
* setbuffer::
* setlinebuf::
* sys_errlist::
* sys_nerr::
* tmpnam_r::
* vasprintf::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/asprintf.texi
@include glibc-functions/cuserid.texi
@include glibc-functions/clearerr_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/fcloseall.texi
@include glibc-functions/feof_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/ferror_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/fflush_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/fgetc_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/fgets_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/fileno_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/fopencookie.texi
@include glibc-functions/fputc_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/fputs_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/fread_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/fwrite_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/getw.texi
@include glibc-functions/putw.texi
@include glibc-functions/renameat2.texi
@include glibc-functions/setbuffer.texi
@include glibc-functions/setlinebuf.texi
@include glibc-functions/sys_errlist.texi
@include glibc-functions/sys_nerr.texi
@include glibc-functions/tmpnam_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/vasprintf.texi

@node Glibc stdlib.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<stdlib.h>}

@menu
* canonicalize_file_name::
* cfree::
* clearenv::
* drand48_r::
* ecvt_r::
* erand48_r::
* fcvt_r::
* getloadavg::
* getpt::
* initstate_r::
* jrand48_r::
* lcong48_r::
* lrand48_r::
* mkostemp::
* mkostemps::
* mkstemps::
* mrand48_r::
* nrand48_r::
* on_exit::
* ptsname_r::
* qecvt::
* qecvt_r::
* qfcvt::
* qfcvt_r::
* qgcvt::
* qsort_r::
* random_r::
* rpmatch::
* secure_getenv::
* seed48_r::
* setstate_r::
* srand48_r::
* srandom_r::
* strtod_l::
* strtof_l::
* strtol_l::
* strtold_l::
* strtoll_l::
* strtoq::
* strtoul_l::
* strtoull_l::
* strtouq::
* valloc::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/canonicalize_file_name.texi
@include glibc-functions/cfree.texi
@include glibc-functions/clearenv.texi
@include glibc-functions/drand48_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/ecvt_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/erand48_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/fcvt_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getloadavg.texi
@include glibc-functions/getpt.texi
@include glibc-functions/initstate_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/jrand48_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/lcong48_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/lrand48_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/mkostemp.texi
@include glibc-functions/mkostemps.texi
@include glibc-functions/mkstemps.texi
@include glibc-functions/mrand48_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/nrand48_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/on_exit.texi
@include glibc-functions/ptsname_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/qecvt.texi
@include glibc-functions/qecvt_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/qfcvt.texi
@include glibc-functions/qfcvt_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/qgcvt.texi
@include glibc-functions/qsort_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/random_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/rpmatch.texi
@include glibc-functions/secure_getenv.texi
@include glibc-functions/seed48_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/setstate_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/srand48_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/srandom_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/strtod_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/strtof_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/strtol_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/strtold_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/strtoll_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/strtoq.texi
@include glibc-functions/strtoul_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/strtoull_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/strtouq.texi
@include glibc-functions/valloc.texi

@node Glibc string.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<string.h>}

@menu
* explicit_bzero::
* ffsl::
* ffsll::
* memfrob::
* memmem::
* mempcpy::
* memrchr::
* rawmemchr::
* sigabbrev_np::
* sigdescr_np::
* strcasestr::
* strchrnul::
* strerrordesc_np::
* strerrorname_np::
* strfry::
* strsep::
* strverscmp::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/explicit_bzero.texi
@include glibc-functions/ffsl.texi
@include glibc-functions/ffsll.texi
@include glibc-functions/memfrob.texi
@include glibc-functions/memmem.texi
@include glibc-functions/mempcpy.texi
@include glibc-functions/memrchr.texi
@include glibc-functions/rawmemchr.texi
@include glibc-functions/sigabbrev_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/sigdescr_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/strcasestr.texi
@include glibc-functions/strchrnul.texi
@include glibc-functions/strerrordesc_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/strerrorname_np.texi
@include glibc-functions/strfry.texi
@include glibc-functions/strsep.texi
@include glibc-functions/strverscmp.texi

@c @node Glibc strings.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<strings.h>}

@c @node Glibc stropts.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<stropts.h>}

@node Glibc sys/auxv.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/auxv.h>}

@menu
* getauxval::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/getauxval.texi

@node Glibc sys/capability.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/capability.h>}

@menu
* capget::
* capset::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/capget.texi
@include glibc-functions/capset.texi

@node Glibc sys/epoll.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/epoll.h>}

@menu
* epoll_create::
* epoll_create1::
* epoll_ctl::
* epoll_pwait::
* epoll_wait::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/epoll_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/epoll_create1.texi
@include glibc-functions/epoll_ctl.texi
@include glibc-functions/epoll_pwait.texi
@include glibc-functions/epoll_wait.texi

@node Glibc sys/eventfd.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/eventfd.h>}

@menu
* eventfd::
* eventfd_read::
* eventfd_write::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/eventfd.texi
@include glibc-functions/eventfd_read.texi
@include glibc-functions/eventfd_write.texi

@node Glibc sys/fanotify.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/fanotify.h>}

@menu
* fanotify_init::
* fanotify_mark::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/fanotify_init.texi
@include glibc-functions/fanotify_mark.texi

@node Glibc sys/file.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/file.h>}

@menu
* flock::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/flock.texi

@node Glibc sys/fsuid.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/fsuid.h>}

@menu
* setfsgid::
* setfsuid::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/setfsgid.texi
@include glibc-functions/setfsuid.texi

@node Glibc sys/gmon.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/gmon.h>}

@menu
* monstartup::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/monstartup.texi

@node Glibc sys/inotify.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/inotify.h>}

@menu
* inotify_add_watch::
* inotify_init::
* inotify_init1::
* inotify_rm_watch::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/inotify_add_watch.texi
@include glibc-functions/inotify_init.texi
@include glibc-functions/inotify_init1.texi
@include glibc-functions/inotify_rm_watch.texi

@node Glibc sys/io.h and sys/perm.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/io.h>}, @code{<sys/perm.h>}

@menu
* ioperm::
* iopl::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/ioperm.texi
@include glibc-functions/iopl.texi

@c @node Glibc sys/ioctl.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<sys/ioctl.h>}

@c @node Glibc sys/ipc.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/ipc.h>}

@node Glibc sys/kdaemon.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/kdaemon.h>}

@menu
* bdflush::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/bdflush.texi

@node Glibc sys/klog.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/klog.h>}

@menu
* klogctl::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/klogctl.texi

@node Glibc sys/mman.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/mman.h>}

@menu
* madvise::
* memfd_create::
* mincore::
* mlock2::
* mremap::
* pkey_alloc::
* pkey_free::
* pkey_get::
* pkey_mprotect::
* pkey_set::
* remap_file_pages::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/madvise.texi
@include glibc-functions/memfd_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/mincore.texi
@include glibc-functions/mlock2.texi
@include glibc-functions/mremap.texi
@include glibc-functions/pkey_alloc.texi
@include glibc-functions/pkey_free.texi
@include glibc-functions/pkey_get.texi
@include glibc-functions/pkey_mprotect.texi
@include glibc-functions/pkey_set.texi
@include glibc-functions/remap_file_pages.texi

@node Glibc sys/mount.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/mount.h>}

@menu
* mount::
* umount::
* umount2::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/mount.texi
@include glibc-functions/umount.texi
@include glibc-functions/umount2.texi

@c @node Glibc sys/msg.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/msg.h>}

@node Glibc sys/personality.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/personality.h>}

@menu
* personality::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/personality.texi

@node Glibc sys/prctl.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/prctl.h>}

@menu
* prctl::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/prctl.texi

@node Glibc sys/profil.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/profil.h>}

@menu
* sprofil::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/sprofil.texi

@node Glibc sys/ptrace.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/ptrace.h>}

@menu
* ptrace::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/ptrace.texi

@node Glibc sys/quota.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/quota.h>}

@menu
* quotactl::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/quotactl.texi

@node Glibc sys/random.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/random.h>}

@menu
* getentropy::
* getrandom::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/getentropy.texi
@include glibc-functions/getrandom.texi

@node Glibc sys/reboot.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/reboot.h>}

@menu
* reboot::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/reboot.texi

@node Glibc sys/resource.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/resource.h>}

@menu
* prlimit::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/prlimit.texi

@c @node Glibc sys/select.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/select.h>}

@node Glibc sys/sem.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/sem.h>}

@menu
* semtimedop::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/semtimedop.texi

@node Glibc sys/sendfile.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/sendfile.h>}

@menu
* sendfile::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/sendfile.texi

@c @node Glibc sys/shm.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/shm.h>}

@node Glibc sys/signalfd.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/signalfd.h>}

@menu
* signalfd::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/signalfd.texi

@node Glibc sys/single_threaded.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/single_threaded.h>}

@menu
* __libc_single_threaded::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/__libc_single_threaded.texi

@node Glibc sys/socket.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/socket.h>}

@menu
* accept4::
* isfdtype::
* recvmmsg::
* sendmmsg::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/accept4.texi
@include glibc-functions/isfdtype.texi
@include glibc-functions/recvmmsg.texi
@include glibc-functions/sendmmsg.texi

@node Glibc sys/stat.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/stat.h>}

@menu
* getumask::
* lchmod::
* statx::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/getumask.texi
@include glibc-functions/lchmod.texi
@include glibc-functions/statx.texi

@node Glibc sys/statfs.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/statfs.h>}

@menu
* fstatfs::
* statfs::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/fstatfs.texi
@include glibc-functions/statfs.texi

@c @node Glibc sys/statvfs.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/statvfs.h>}

@node Glibc sys/swap.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/swap.h>}

@menu
* swapoff::
* swapon::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/swapoff.texi
@include glibc-functions/swapon.texi

@node Glibc sys/sysctl.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/sysctl.h>}

@menu
* sysctl::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/sysctl.texi

@node Glibc sys/sysinfo.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/sysinfo.h>}

@menu
* get_avphys_pages::
* get_nprocs::
* get_nprocs_conf::
* get_phys_pages::
* sysinfo::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/get_avphys_pages.texi
@include glibc-functions/get_nprocs.texi
@include glibc-functions/get_nprocs_conf.texi
@include glibc-functions/get_phys_pages.texi
@include glibc-functions/sysinfo.texi

@node Glibc sys/syslog.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/syslog.h>}

@menu
* vsyslog::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/vsyslog.texi

@node Glibc sys/sysmacros.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/sysmacros.h>}

@menu
* gnu_dev_major::
* gnu_dev_makedev::
* gnu_dev_minor::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/gnu_dev_major.texi
@include glibc-functions/gnu_dev_makedev.texi
@include glibc-functions/gnu_dev_minor.texi

@node Glibc sys/time.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/time.h>}

@menu
* adjtime::
* futimes::
* futimesat::
* lutimes::
* settimeofday::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/adjtime.texi
@include glibc-functions/futimes.texi
@include glibc-functions/futimesat.texi
@include glibc-functions/lutimes.texi
@include glibc-functions/settimeofday.texi

@c @node Glibc sys/timeb.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/timeb.h>}

@node Glibc sys/timerfd.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/timerfd.h>}

@menu
* timerfd_create::
* timerfd_gettime::
* timerfd_settime::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/timerfd_create.texi
@include glibc-functions/timerfd_gettime.texi
@include glibc-functions/timerfd_settime.texi

@c @node Glibc sys/times.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/times.h>}

@node Glibc sys/timex.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/timex.h>}

@menu
* adjtimex::
* ntp_adjtime::
* ntp_gettime::
* ntp_gettimex::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/adjtimex.texi
@include glibc-functions/ntp_adjtime.texi
@include glibc-functions/ntp_gettime.texi
@include glibc-functions/ntp_gettimex.texi

@c @node Glibc sys/types.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/types.h>}

@node Glibc sys/uio.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/uio.h>}

@menu
* preadv::
* preadv2::
* process_vm_readv::
* process_vm_writev::
* pwritev::
* pwritev2::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/preadv.texi
@include glibc-functions/preadv2.texi
@include glibc-functions/process_vm_readv.texi
@include glibc-functions/process_vm_writev.texi
@include glibc-functions/pwritev.texi
@include glibc-functions/pwritev2.texi

@c @node Glibc sys/un.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/un.h>}

@node Glibc sys/ustat.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/ustat.h>}

@menu
* ustat::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/ustat.texi

@c @node Glibc sys/utsname.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/utsname.h>}

@node Glibc sys/vlimit.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/vlimit.h>}

@menu
* vlimit::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/vlimit.texi

@c @node Glibc sys/vm86.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<sys/vm86.h>}

@node Glibc sys/wait.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<sys/wait.h>}

@menu
* wait3::
* wait4::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/wait3.texi
@include glibc-functions/wait4.texi

@node Glibc sys/xattr.h
@section Glibc @code{<sys/xattr.h>}

@menu
* fgetxattr::
* flistxattr::
* fremovexattr::
* fsetxattr::
* getxattr::
* lgetxattr::
* listxattr::
* llistxattr::
* lremovexattr::
* lsetxattr::
* removexattr::
* setxattr::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/fgetxattr.texi
@include glibc-functions/flistxattr.texi
@include glibc-functions/fremovexattr.texi
@include glibc-functions/fsetxattr.texi
@include glibc-functions/getxattr.texi
@include glibc-functions/lgetxattr.texi
@include glibc-functions/listxattr.texi
@include glibc-functions/llistxattr.texi
@include glibc-functions/lremovexattr.texi
@include glibc-functions/lsetxattr.texi
@include glibc-functions/removexattr.texi
@include glibc-functions/setxattr.texi

@c @node Glibc sysexits.h
@c @section Glibc @code{<sysexits.h>}

@c @node Glibc syslog.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<syslog.h>}

@c @node Glibc tar.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<tar.h>}

@node Glibc termios.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<termios.h>}

@menu
* cfmakeraw::
* cfsetspeed::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/cfmakeraw.texi
@include glibc-functions/cfsetspeed.texi

@c @node Glibc tgmath.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<tgmath.h>}

@node Glibc time.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<time.h>}

@menu
* clock_adjtime::
* dysize::
* getdate_r::
* stime::
* strptime_l::
* timegm::
* timelocal::
* timespec_get::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/clock_adjtime.texi
@include glibc-functions/dysize.texi
@include glibc-functions/getdate_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/stime.texi
@include glibc-functions/strptime_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/timegm.texi
@include glibc-functions/timelocal.texi
@include glibc-functions/timespec_get.texi

@c @node Glibc trace.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<trace.h>}

@node Glibc ttyent.h
@section Glibc @code{<ttyent.h>}

@menu
* endttyent::
* getttyent::
* getttynam::
* setttyent::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/endttyent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getttyent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getttynam.texi
@include glibc-functions/setttyent.texi

@c @node Glibc uchar.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<uchar.h>}

@c @node Glibc ucontext.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<ucontext.h>}

@c @node Glibc ulimit.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<ulimit.h>}

@node Glibc unistd.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<unistd.h>}

@menu
* _Fork::
* acct::
* brk::
* chroot::
* closefrom::
* copy_file_range::
* daemon::
* dup3::
* eaccess::
* endusershell::
* euidaccess::
* execveat::
* execvpe::
* get_current_dir_name::
* getdomainname::
* getdtablesize::
* getpagesize::
* getpass::
* getresgid::
* getresuid::
* gettid::
* getusershell::
* group_member::
* pipe2::
* profil::
* revoke::
* sbrk::
* setlogin::
* setdomainname::
* sethostid::
* sethostname::
* setresgid::
* setresuid::
* setusershell::
* syncfs::
* syscall::
* ttyslot::
* vhangup::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/_Fork.texi
@include glibc-functions/acct.texi
@include glibc-functions/brk.texi
@include glibc-functions/chroot.texi
@include glibc-functions/closefrom.texi
@include glibc-functions/copy_file_range.texi
@include glibc-functions/daemon.texi
@include glibc-functions/dup3.texi
@include glibc-functions/eaccess.texi
@include glibc-functions/endusershell.texi
@include glibc-functions/euidaccess.texi
@include glibc-functions/execveat.texi
@include glibc-functions/execvpe.texi
@include glibc-functions/get_current_dir_name.texi
@include glibc-functions/getdomainname.texi
@include glibc-functions/getdtablesize.texi
@include glibc-functions/getpagesize.texi
@include glibc-functions/getpass.texi
@include glibc-functions/getresgid.texi
@include glibc-functions/getresuid.texi
@include glibc-functions/gettid.texi
@include glibc-functions/getusershell.texi
@include glibc-functions/group_member.texi
@include glibc-functions/pipe2.texi
@include glibc-functions/profil.texi
@include glibc-functions/revoke.texi
@include glibc-functions/sbrk.texi
@include glibc-functions/setlogin.texi
@include glibc-functions/setdomainname.texi
@include glibc-functions/sethostid.texi
@include glibc-functions/sethostname.texi
@include glibc-functions/setresgid.texi
@include glibc-functions/setresuid.texi
@include glibc-functions/setusershell.texi
@include glibc-functions/syncfs.texi
@include glibc-functions/syscall.texi
@include glibc-functions/ttyslot.texi
@include glibc-functions/vhangup.texi

@c @node Glibc utime.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<utime.h>}

@node Glibc utmp.h
@section Glibc @code{<utmp.h>}

@menu
* endutent::
* getutent::
* getutent_r::
* getutid::
* getutid_r::
* getutline::
* getutline_r::
* pututline::
* setutent::
* updwtmp::
* utmpname::
* login::
* login_tty::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/endutent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getutent.texi
@include glibc-functions/getutent_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getutid.texi
@include glibc-functions/getutid_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/getutline.texi
@include glibc-functions/getutline_r.texi
@include glibc-functions/pututline.texi
@include glibc-functions/setutent.texi
@include glibc-functions/updwtmp.texi
@include glibc-functions/utmpname.texi
@include glibc-functions/login.texi
@include glibc-functions/login_tty.texi

@node Glibc utmpx.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<utmpx.h>}

@menu
* getutmp::
* getutmpx::
* updwtmpx::
* utmpxname::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/getutmp.texi
@include glibc-functions/getutmpx.texi
@include glibc-functions/updwtmpx.texi
@include glibc-functions/utmpxname.texi

@node Glibc wchar.h
@section Glibc Extensions to @code{<wchar.h>}

@menu
* fgetwc_unlocked::
* fgetws_unlocked::
* fputwc_unlocked::
* fputws_unlocked::
* getwc_unlocked::
* getwchar_unlocked::
* putwc_unlocked::
* putwchar_unlocked::
* wcschrnul::
* wcsftime_l::
* wcstod_l::
* wcstof_l::
* wcstol_l::
* wcstold_l::
* wcstoll_l::
* wcstoq::
* wcstoul_l::
* wcstoull_l::
* wcstouq::
* wmempcpy::
@end menu

@include glibc-functions/fgetwc_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/fgetws_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/fputwc_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/fputws_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/getwc_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/getwchar_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/putwc_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/putwchar_unlocked.texi
@include glibc-functions/wcschrnul.texi
@include glibc-functions/wcsftime_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/wcstod_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/wcstof_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/wcstol_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/wcstold_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/wcstoll_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/wcstoq.texi
@include glibc-functions/wcstoul_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/wcstoull_l.texi
@include glibc-functions/wcstouq.texi
@include glibc-functions/wmempcpy.texi

@c @node Glibc wctype.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<wctype.h>}

@c @node Glibc wordexp.h
@c @section Glibc Extensions to @code{<wordexp.h>}


@node Native Windows Support
@chapter Native Windows Support

There are three ways to create binaries that run on Microsoft Windows:
@itemize
@item
Native binaries, built using the MinGW tool chain.
@item
Native binaries, built using the MSVC (MS Visual C/C++) tool chain.
@item
Binaries for the Cygwin environment.
@end itemize

This chapter deals with the MinGW and MSVC platforms, commonly called
``native Windows'' platforms.  Cygwin, on the other hand, is close enough
to POSIX that it can be treated like any other Unix-like platform.

@menu
* Libtool and Windows::
* Large File Support::
* Inode numbers on Windows::
* Precise file timestamps on Windows::
* Avoiding the year 2038 problem::
* Windows sockets::
* Native Windows Support without MSVC Support::
* Visual Studio Compatibility::
@end menu

@include windows-libtool.texi

@include largefile.texi

@include windows-stat-inodes.texi

@include windows-stat-timespec.texi

@include year2038.texi

@include windows-sockets.texi

@include windows-without-msvc.texi

@include ld-output-def.texi


@include multithread.texi


@node Particular Modules
@chapter Particular Modules

@menu
* alloca::
* alloca-opt::
* Safe Allocation Macros::
* Attributes::
* Compile-time Assertions::
* Non-returning Functions::
* Integer Properties::
* static inline::
* extern inline::
* Closed standard fds::
* Container data types::
* String Functions in C Locale::
* Recognizing Option Arguments::
* Quoting::
* progname and getprogname::
* gcd::
* Profiling of program phases::
* Library version handling::
* Supporting Relocation::
* func::
* stat-size::
@end menu

@node alloca
@section alloca
@findex alloca
@include alloca.texi

@node alloca-opt
@section alloca-opt
@findex alloca
@include alloca-opt.texi

@include safe-alloc.texi

@include attribute.texi

@include verify.texi

@include noreturn.texi

@include intprops.texi

@include static-inline.texi

@include extern-inline.texi

@include xstdopen.texi

@include containers.texi

@include c-locale.texi

@include argmatch.texi

@include quote.texi

@include progname.texi

@include gcd.texi

@include timevar.texi

@include check-version.texi

@include relocatable-maint.texi

@include func.texi

@include stat-size.texi


@node Regular expressions
@chapter Regular expressions

@menu
* Overview::
* Regular Expression Syntax::
* Common Operators::
* GNU Operators::
* What Gets Matched?::
* Programming with Regex::
* Regular expression syntaxes::
@end menu

@lowersections
@include regex.texi
@raisesections

@node Regular expression syntaxes
@section Regular expression syntaxes

Gnulib supports many different types of regular expressions; although
the underlying features are the same or identical, the syntax used
varies.  The descriptions given here for the different types are
generated automatically.

@include regexprops-generic.texi


@node Build Infrastructure Modules
@chapter Build Infrastructure Modules

Gnulib has a couple of modules that don't provide code, but rather
extend the GNU Build System.  That is, they are convenience facilities
for use with GNU Automake (in particular).

@menu
* Searching for Libraries::
* Exported Symbols of Shared Libraries::
* LD Version Scripts::
* configmake::
* warnings::
* manywarnings::
* Running self-tests under valgrind::
* VCS To ChangeLog::
@end menu

@include havelib.texi

@include lib-symbol-visibility.texi

@include ld-version-script.texi

@include configmake.texi

@include warnings.texi

@include manywarnings.texi

@include valgrind-tests.texi

@include vcs-to-changelog.texi


@node Build Infrastructure Files
@chapter Build Infrastructure Files

Gnulib contains also a small number of files that are not part of
modules.  They are meant to be imported into packages by means of
@samp{gnulib-tool --copy-file}, not @samp{gnulib-tool --import}.  For
example, the commands to import the files @code{config.guess} and
@code{config.sub} are
@smallexample
for file in config.guess config.sub; do
  $GNULIB_TOOL --copy-file build-aux/$file \
    && chmod a+x build-aux/$file \
    || exit $?
done
@end smallexample

Packages that don't use Gnulib can get hold of these files through
direct download from Gnulib's git repository.  The commands to do this
look as follows:
@smallexample
for file in config.guess config.sub; do
  echo "$0: getting $file..."
  wget -q --timeout=5 -O build-aux/$file.tmp "https://git.savannah.gnu.org/gitweb/?p=gnulib.git;a=blob_plain;f=build-aux/$@{file@};hb=HEAD" \
    && mv build-aux/$file.tmp build-aux/$file \
    && chmod a+x build-aux/$file
  retval=$?
  rm -f build-aux/$file.tmp
  test $retval -eq 0 || exit $retval
done
@end smallexample

@menu
* Recognizing platforms::
* Utilities for Makefiles::
* Developer tools::
* For building documentation::
* For building libraries::
* For running tests::
@end menu

@node Recognizing platforms
@section Recognizing platforms

@table @code
@item build-aux/config.guess
@itemx build-aux/config.sub
These files are helper scripts, invoked by the @samp{configure} script.
@code{config.guess} recognizes the platform on which the script is
running, and produces a triplet of the form
@code{@var{cpu-type}-@var{vendor}-@var{operating_system}}.
@code{config.sub} receives a possibly abbreviated triplet and produces a
canonical triplet for a platform.  For more information, see
@ifinfo
@ref{Configuration,,,standards}.
@end ifinfo
@ifnotinfo
@url{https://www.gnu.org/prep/standards/html_node/Configuration.html}.
@end ifnotinfo
@end table

It is important that you always include the newest versions of these two
files in your tarball, because people who work on emerging platforms
otherwise have a hard time building your package.

@node Utilities for Makefiles
@section Utilities for Makefiles

These are a couple of programs that are often useful in Makefiles.  Some
of them are also described in
@ifinfo
@ref{Auxiliary Programs,,,automake}.
@end ifinfo
@ifnotinfo
@url{https://www.gnu.org/software/automake/manual/html_node/Auxiliary-Programs.html}.
@end ifnotinfo

@table @code
@item build-aux/ar-lib
@itemx build-aux/compile
These two scripts are necessary for supporting portability to native
Windows with the MSVC compiler.  @code{compile} is a wrapper script that
invokes the compiler and provides a command-line interface compatible
with Unix compilers.  Similarly, @code{ar-lib} is a wrapper script that
provides a command-line interface compatible with Unix @code{ar}.
@item build-aux/depcomp
This is a helper script, used by Makefile rules generated by GNU
Automake.  It generates Makefile dependencies while compiling a file.
@item build-aux/install-sh
This is a helper script, used by Makefile rules generated by GNU
Automake.  It installs files during the @code{make install} phase.  In
the Makefile, don't use this file directly; always use
@code{$(INSTALL_PROGRAM)} or @code{$(INSTALL_DATA)} instead.
@item build-aux/mdate-sh
This script determines the modification time of a file and pretty-prints
it.  The typical use is to add a ``Last modified'' line to the
documentation.
@item build-aux/mkinstalldirs
This is a helper script, used by Makefile rules generated by GNU
Automake.  It creates directories during the @code{make install} phase.
It is roughly equivalent to @samp{mkdir -p} (except that the latter is
not portable).  In the Makefile, don't use this file directly; always
use @code{$(MKDIR_P)} instead.
@item build-aux/mktempd
This script creates a temporary directory.  It is roughly equivalent to
@samp{mktemp -d} (except that the latter is not portable).
@item build-aux/move-if-change
This script moves a freshly generated file to a destination file, with a
special optimization for the case that both files are identical.  In
this case the freshly generated file is deleted, and the time stamp of
the destination file is @emph{not} changed.  This is useful when
updating a file that rarely actually changes and which many Makefile
targets depend upon.
@end table

@node Developer tools
@section Programs for developing in Git checkouts

These are a couple of programs that help when developing in a Git
checkout.  The maintainer of the package copies these programs into the
version control of the package, so that co-developers can use these
tools right away.

@table @code
@item top/gitsub.sh
This program manages the subdirectories of a Git checkout that come from
other packages, including Gnulib.

@item top/bootstrap
@itemx top/autopull.sh
@itemx top/autogen.sh
@itemx top/bootstrap-funclib.sh
This is a set of three programs and a function library, that manage
the source directory of a package, preparing for the state where
@samp{./configure} can be used.

@code{autopull.sh} is a program for fetching dependencies that may
require network accesses.  It manages the Git submodules, including
Gnulib --- assuming that Gnulib is a Git submodule. It also can fetch
the PO files for internationalized packages.

@code{autogen.sh} is a program that is meant to be run after
@code{autopull.sh}.  It generates all autogeneratable files that are
omitted from version control.  Usually this means that it invokes
@code{gnulib-tool} and @code{automake}, that generate files from other
files.

@code{bootstrap} is a wrapper around both: It invokes @code{autopull.sh}
and then immediately @code{autogen.sh}.@*
Note: Because this program mixes version control management and
generation of files in non-obvious ways, it has a number of usability
issues for the advanced developer.

@code{bootstrap-funclib.sh} is a function library for these three
programs.  It is not meant to be used directly.

All three programs make use of a configuration file, called
@code{bootstrap.conf}.

@item build-aux/bootstrap.conf
This is the template configuration file.  After copying it into the
top-level directory of your package, you need to customize it.

@item build-aux/po/Makefile.in.in
@itemx build-aux/po/remove-potcdate.sin
These are auxiliary files used by @code{bootstrap}.  You don't have to
copy them yourself; @code{bootstrap} will do that.
@end table

@node For building documentation
@section Utilities for building documentation

These are auxiliary files for building documentation.

@table @code
@item build-aux/texinfo.tex
This file is needed for the conversion of Texinfo-format documentation
to PDF, PostScript, or DVI formats.  It implements the GNU Texinfo
commands on top of plain TeX.
@item build-aux/x-to-1.in
This file, once processed, gives a program @code{x-to-1}, that produces
a manual page for a program, by combining a skeleton with the program's
@code{--help} output.
@end table

@node For building libraries
@section Utilities for building libraries

@table @code
@item build-aux/declared.sh
This program extracts the declared global symbols of a C header file.
It is useful when you want to control the set of symbols exported by a
library.  See @ref{Exported Symbols of Shared Libraries}.
@end table

@node For running tests
@section Utilities for running test suites

@table @code
@item build-aux/run-test
This file is a test driver that supports running a test under
@code{valgrind}.
@item build-aux/test-driver.diff
This is a patch, against Automake's test driver, that supports running a
test suite on Android.
@end table


@node Release Management Files
@chapter Release Management Files

Gnulib also contain a few scripts that are useful for the release
management of a package.  They can be used directly off the Gnulib
checkout; they don't need to copied first.

@menu
* For building shared libraries::
* For uploading releases::
@end menu

@node For building shared libraries
@section Tools for releasing packages with shared libraries

@table @code
@item build-aux/libtool-next-version
This program is a wizard that helps a maintainer update the libtool
version of a shared library, without making mistakes in this process.
For background documentation, see
@ifinfo
@ref{Updating version info,,,libtool}.
@end ifinfo
@ifnotinfo
@url{https://www.gnu.org/software/libtool/manual/html_node/Updating-version-info.html}.
@end ifnotinfo
@end table

@node For uploading releases
@section Tools for uploading release tarballs

@table @code
@item build-aux/gnupload
This program is a user-friendly way to upload a release tarball to one of
the GNU servers (@code{ftp.gnu.org} or @code{alpha.gnu.org}).  It
implements the interface described in
@ifinfo
@ref{Automated FTP Uploads,,,maintain}.
@end ifinfo
@ifnotinfo
@url{https://www.gnu.org/prep/maintain/html_node/Automated-FTP-Uploads.html}.
@end ifnotinfo
@item build-aux/ncftpput-ftp
This is a helper program that mimics the @code{ncftpput} program used by
@code{gnupload}.  If you want to use @code{gnupload} but don't have
@code{ncftp} installed, copy this file into your $PATH, renaming it to
@code{ncftpput}.
@end table


@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl-1.3.texi


@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

@c Local Variables:
@c indent-tabs-mode: nil
@c whitespace-check-buffer-indent: nil
@c End:
