@node Printing --version and bug-reporting information
@section Printing --version and bug-reporting information

@c Copyright (C) 2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
@c under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
@c any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
@c Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
@c copy of the license is at <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.3.en.html>.

@c Written by Collin Funk

Gnulib provides a few modules for printing @code{--version} and
bug-reporting information according to the GNU Coding Standards; see
@ifinfo
@ref{--version,,,standards}.
@end ifinfo
@ifnotinfo
@url{https://www.gnu.org/prep/standards/html_node/_002d_002dversion.html#g_t_002d_002dversion}
@end ifnotinfo

@mindex version-etc
The @samp{version-etc} module defines functions used to emit
@code{--version} and bug-reporting input in a standard way.  The module
expects the string @code{version_etc_copyright} to be defined to display
the copyright holder along with the package release year.  The
@code{version_etc} function can then be used like so:

@smallexample

const char version_etc_copyright[] = "Copyright %s %d copyright-holder";

int
main (void)
@{
  version_etc (stdout, "my-program", "my-package", "1.0",
               "author1", "author2", (const char *) NULL);
  return 0;
@}
@end smallexample

The above example generates the following output:

@smallexample
my-program (my-package) 1.0
Copyright (C) 2025 copyright-holder
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

Written by author1 and author2.
@end smallexample

The @samp{version-etc} module also defines the function
@code{emit_bug_reporting_address} which emits the bug-reporting location
based on arguments passed to @code{AC_INIT}.  For example, using the
following in @file{configure.ac}:

@smallexample
AC_INIT([gnulib], [0.0], [bug-gnulib@@gnu.org], [gnulib],
        [https://www.gnu.org/software/gnulib/])
@end smallexample

And the following program:

@smallexample
#include <config.h>

#include "version-etc.h"

int
main (void)
@{
  emit_bug_reporting_address ();
  return 0;
@}
@end smallexample

Will output:

@smallexample
Report bugs to: bug-gnulib@@gnu.org
gnulib home page: <https://www.gnu.org/software/gnulib/>
General help using GNU software: <https://www.gnu.org/gethelp/>
@end smallexample

@mindex version-etc-fsf
The @samp{version-etc-fsf} module defines and links to the variable
@code{version_etc_copyright} containing copyright information for Free
Software Foundation.  This module should be used by programs which are
FSF-copyrighted and use the @samp{version-etc} module.

@mindex argp-version-etc
The @samp{argp-version-etc} defines the @code{argp_version_setup}
function takes the program name and authors as arguments.  This function
should be called before @code{argp_parse} since it modifies argp global
variables; see
@ifinfo
@ref{Argp Global Variables,,Argp Global Variables,libc}.
@end ifinfo
@ifnotinfo
@url{https://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/html_node/Argp-Global-Variables.html}.
@end ifnotinfo
