@node Avoiding the year 2038 problem
@section Avoiding the year 2038 problem

The @dfn{year 2038 problem} denotes unpredictable behaviour that will
likely occur in the year 2038, for programs that use a 32-bit signed
integer @samp{time_t} type that cannot represent timestamps on or
after 2038-01-19 03:14:08 UTC@.  See
@url{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Year_2038_problem, Year 2038
problem} for details.

@mindex year2038
The Gnulib module @samp{year2038} fixes this problem on some
platforms, by making @code{time_t} wide enough to represent timestamps
after 2038.  This has no effect on most current platforms, which have
timestamps that are already wide enough.  However, @samp{year2038} by
default arranges for builds on legacy 32-bit Linux kernels running
glibc 2.34 and later to compile with @samp{_TIME_BITS=64} to get wider
timestamps.  On older platforms that do not support timestamps after
the year 2038, @samp{year2038} causes @command{configure} to issue a
warning but still proceed.  On platforms that appear to support
post-2038 timestamps but where something prevents this from working,
@command{configure} fails.

The default behavior of @samp{year2038} can be overridden by using the
@command{configure} option @option{--disable-year2038}, which
suppresses support for post-2038 timestamps.  This may be useful if
the package links to other libraries whose user-facing ABIs still
require @code{time_t} to be 32-bit on your platform.

@mindex year2038-recommended
The Gnulib module @samp{year2038-recommended} is like @samp{year2038},
except it by default rejects platforms where @code{time_t} cannot represent
timestamps after 2038.  If this module is used and a 32-platform cannot support
64-bit @code{time_t}, one can still fix the year-2038 problem by using
a 64-bit instead of a 32-bit build, as noted in the architecture list
below.  If all else fails one can configure with
@option{--disable-year2038}; however, the resulting programs will
mishandle timestamps after 2038.

The Gnulib module @samp{year2038-recommended} is designed
for packages intended for use on 32-bit platforms
after the year 2038.  If your package is commonly built on
32-bit platforms that will not be used after the year 2038,
you can use the @samp{year2038} module instead, to save builders
the trouble of configuring with @option{--disable-year2038}.

@mindex largefile
If the Gnulib module @samp{largefile} is used but neither
@samp{year2038} nor @samp{year2038-recommended} is used,
@command{configure} will have an option @option{--enable-year2038}
that causes @code{configure} to behave as if @samp{year2038} was used.
This is for packages that have long used @samp{largefile} but have not
gotten around to upgrading their Gnulib module list to include
@samp{year2038} or @samp{year2038-recommended}.
@xref{Large File Support}.

With the @samp{year2038-recommended} module, @command{configure} by
default should work on the following 32-bit platforms (or 32-bit ABIs
in bi-arch systems):

@itemize
@item
Linux kernel 5.1 (2019) and later with glibc 2.34 (2021) and later on
x86, arm, mips (o32 or n32 ABI), powerpc32, sparc32, s390, hppa, m68k, sh, csky, microblaze, nios2,
@item
Linux kernel 5.1 (2019) and later with musl libc 1.2 (2020) and later on x86,
@item
Linux on arc, loong32, or1k, riscv32 and x86_64-x32,
@item
NetBSD 6.0 (2012) and later on x86 and sparc,
@item
OpenBSD 5.5 (2014) and later on x86,
@item
FreeBSD/arm,
@item
Minix 3.3 (2014).
@end itemize

@noindent
Whereas with @samp{year2038-recommended}, @command{configure} should
by default fail on earlier versions of the abovementioned platforms if
a version is listed, and it should also by default fail on all
versions of the following older 32-bit platforms or ABIs:

@itemize
@item
Android on ARMv7 or x86,
@item
Mac OS X 10.6 (2009) and earlier on x86 and powerpc,
@item
GNU/Hurd/x86,
@item
GNU/kFreeBSD/x86,
@item
FreeBSD/x86 (this port demoted to Tier 2 in FreeBSD 13 [2021]
and planned to never have 64-bit @code{time_t}),
@item
MidnightBSD/x86,
@item
AIX/powerpc (to fix, configure with @samp{CC='gcc -maix64' AR='ar -X64'}),
@item
Solaris 11.4 (2018) and earlier on x86 and sparc
(to fix, configure with @samp{CC='gcc -m64'}),
@item
Cygwin 3.3.6 (2022) and earlier on x86,
@item
Haiku/x86.
@end itemize

If you use the @samp{year2038} or @samp{year2038-recommended} modules,
and configure to support timestamps after the year 2038,
your code should not include @samp{<utmp.h>} or @samp{<utmpx.h>}
directly, because these include files do not work with 64-bit timestamps
if the platform's @code{time_t} was traditionally 32 bits.
Your code can instead use the @samp{readutmp} module,
which works around this problem.
