@node fstat
@section @code{fstat}
@findex fstat

POSIX specification:@* @url{https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/fstat.html}

Gnulib module: fstat

Portability problems fixed by Gnulib:
@itemize
@item
This function crashes when invoked with invalid arguments on some platforms:
MSVC 14.
@item
On platforms where @code{off_t} is a 32-bit type, @code{fstat} may not correctly
report the size of files or block devices larger than 2 GB.
(Cf. @code{AC_SYS_LARGEFILE}.)
@item
On Linux/x86 and Linux/x86_64, applications compiled in 32-bit mode cannot
access files that happen to have a 64-bit inode number.  This can occur with
file systems such as XFS (typically on large disks) and NFS.
(Cf. @code{AC_SYS_LARGEFILE}.)
@item
On Solaris 11.4, when this function yields a timestamp with a
nonpositive @code{tv_sec} value, @code{tv_nsec} might be in the range
@minus{}1000000000..@minus{}1, representing a negative nanoseconds
offset from @code{tv_sec}.
@item
The @code{st_atime}, @code{st_ctime}, @code{st_mtime} fields are affected by
the current time zone and by the DST flag of the current time zone on some
platforms:
mingw, MSVC 14 (when the environment variable @code{TZ} is set).
@end itemize

Portability problems not fixed by Gnulib:
@itemize
@item
@xref{sys/stat.h}, for general portability problems with @code{struct stat}.
@item
On Cygwin, @code{fstat} applied to the file descriptors 0 and 1, returns
different @code{st_ino} values, even if standard input and standard output
are not redirected and refer to the same terminal.
@end itemize
