@node mbrtoc32
@subsection @code{mbrtoc32}
@findex mbrtoc32

ISO C23 specification:@* @url{https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n3220.pdf} section 7.30.1.5.

POSIX specification:@* @url{https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/functions/mbrtoc32.html}

Gnulib module: mbrtoc32 or mbrtoc32-regular
@mindex mbrtoc32
@mindex mbrtoc32-regular

Portability problems fixed by either Gnulib module @code{mbrtoc32} or @code{mbrtoc32-regular}:
@itemize
@item
This function is missing on most non-glibc platforms:
glibc 2.15, macOS 14, FreeBSD 6.4, NetBSD 10.0, OpenBSD 7.3, Minix 3.1.8, AIX 7.1, HP-UX 11.31, Solaris 11.3, Cygwin 3.4.x, mingw, MSVC 9, Android 4.4.
@item
In the C or POSIX locales, this function can return @code{(size_t) -1}
and set @code{errno} to @code{EILSEQ}:
@c https://sourceware.org/PR19932
@c https://sourceware.org/PR29511
glibc 2.35.
@item
This function returns 0 instead of @code{(size_t) -2} when the input
is empty:
@c https://sourceware.org/PR16950
glibc 2.19,
mingw,
@c https://issuetracker.google.com/issues/289419880
Android 11,
@c https://dev.haiku-os.org/ticket/18350
Haiku.
@item
This function does not recognize multibyte sequences that @code{mbrtowc}
recognizes on some platforms:
@c https://bugs.freebsd.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=272293
FreeBSD 13.2,
Solaris 11.4, mingw, MSVC 14.
@c For MSVC this is because it assumes that the input is always UTF-8 encoded.
@c See https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/c-runtime-library/reference/mbrtoc16-mbrtoc323
@item
This function does not work when it's fed the input bytes one-by-one
on some platforms:
@c https://cygwin.com/pipermail/cygwin/2024-May/255989.html
@c https://cygwin.com/pipermail/cygwin/2024-May/255990.html
Cygwin 3.5.3.
@end itemize

Portability problems fixed by Gnulib module @code{mbrtoc32-regular}:
@itemize
@item
This function can map some multibyte characters to a sequence of two or more
Unicode characters, and may thus return @code{(size_t) -3}.
No known implementation currently (2023) behaves that way, but it may
theoretically happen.
With the @code{mbrtoc32-regular} module, you have the guarantee that the
Gnulib-provided @code{mbrtoc32} function maps each multibyte character to
exactly one Unicode character and thus never returns @code{(size_t) -3}.
@item
This function behaves incorrectly when converting precomposed characters
from the BIG5-HKSCS encoding:
@c https://sourceware.org/PR30611
glibc 2.36.
@end itemize

Portability problems not fixed by Gnulib:
@itemize
@item
This function is only defined as an inline function on some platforms:
Haiku 2020.
@end itemize

@mindex uchar-h-c23
Note: If you want the guarantee that the @code{char32_t} values returned
by this function are Unicode code points, you also need to request the
@code{uchar-h-c23} module.
