@node stat
@section @code{stat}
@findex stat

POSIX specification:@* @url{https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/stat.html}

Gnulib module: stat

Portability problems fixed by Gnulib:
@itemize
@item
On platforms where @code{off_t} is a 32-bit type, @code{stat} may not correctly
report the size of files or block devices larger than 2 GB.
(Cf. @code{AC_SYS_LARGEFILE}.)
@item
On Linux/x86 and Linux/x86_64, applications compiled in 32-bit mode cannot
access files that happen to have a 64-bit inode number.  This can occur with
file systems such as XFS (typically on large disks) and NFS.
(Cf. @code{AC_SYS_LARGEFILE}.)
@item
The @code{st_atime}, @code{st_ctime}, @code{st_mtime} fields are affected by
the current time zone and by the DST flag of the current time zone on some
platforms:
mingw, MSVC 14 (when the environment variable @code{TZ} is set).
@item
On MSVC 14, this function fails with error @code{ENOENT}
on files such as @samp{C:\pagefile.sys} and
on directories such as @samp{C:\System Volume Information}.
@item
On some platforms, @code{stat("link-to-file/",buf)} succeeds instead
of failing with @code{ENOTDIR}.
macOS 11.1, FreeBSD 7.2, AIX 7.1, Solaris 9, mingw64.
@item
On some platforms, @code{stat(".",buf)} and @code{stat("./",buf)} give
different results:
mingw, MSVC 14.
@item
On Solaris 11.4, when this function yields a timestamp with a
nonpositive @code{tv_sec} value, @code{tv_nsec} might be in the range
@minus{}1000000000..@minus{}1, representing a negative nanoseconds
offset from @code{tv_sec}.
@end itemize

Portability problems not fixed by Gnulib:
@itemize
@item
@xref{sys/stat.h}, for general portability problems with @code{struct stat}.
@item
Cygwin's @code{stat} function sometimes sets @code{errno} to @code{EACCES} when
@code{ENOENT} would be more appropriate.
@item
Because of the definition of @code{struct stat}, it is not possible to
portably replace @code{stat} via an object-like macro.  Therefore,
expressions such as @code{(islnk ? lstat : stat) (name, buf)} are not
portable, and should instead be written @code{islnk ? lstat (name,
buf) : stat (name, buf)}.
@end itemize
