@node strtod
@subsection @code{strtod}
@findex strtod

POSIX specification:@* @url{https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/functions/strtod.html}

Gnulib module: strtod or strtod-obsolete
@mindex strtod
@mindex strtod-obsolete

Portability problems fixed by either Gnulib module @code{strtod} or @code{strtod-obsolete}:
@itemize
@item
This function mis-parses strings with leading @samp{+} on some old platforms:
Old versions of Linux.

@item
This function returns a wrong end pointer on some old platforms.

@item
This function allows whitespace between @samp{e} and the exponent on
some platforms:
HP-UX 11.11.

@item
This function returns the wrong end pointer for @samp{-0x} on some
platforms:
glibc 2.4, Mac OS X 10.5, FreeBSD 6.2, AIX 7.1, Cygwin < 1.5.25-11.

@item
This function fails to parse Infinities and plain NaNs on some platforms:
OpenBSD 4.0, HP-UX 11.11, Solaris 9, mingw, MSVC 14.

@item
This function fails to parse @samp{NaN()} on some platforms:
glibc 2.3.6, Mac OS X 10.5, FreeBSD 6.2, OpenBSD 4.0, AIX 7.1, HP-UX 11.11, Cygwin < 1.5.25-11, mingw, MSVC 14.

@item
This function fails to parse @samp{NaN(@var{n-char-sequence})} on some
platforms:
OpenBSD 4.0, HP-UX 11.11, mingw, MSVC 14.

@item
This function parses @samp{NaN(@var{n-char-sequence})}, but returns
the wrong end pointer on some platforms:
glibc 2.4, AIX 7.1.

@item
This function misparses @samp{nan(} on some platforms:
macOS 10.6.6.

@item
This function fails to parse C99 hexadecimal floating point on some
platforms:
NetBSD 5.0, OpenBSD 4.0, AIX 5.1, HP-UX 11.11, Solaris 11.4, mingw, MSVC 14.

@item
In hexadecimal floats, this function allows whitespace between @samp{p}
and the exponent on some platforms:
HP-UX 11.31/ia64.

@item
This function returns the wrong end pointer for @samp{0x1p} on some
platforms:
AIX 7.1.

@item
@c The term "underflow", as defined by ISO C23 ยง 7.12.1.(6), includes both
@c "gradual underflow" (result is a denormalized number) and "flush-to-zero
@c underflow" (result is zero).
This function fails to set @code{errno} upon gradual underflow (resulting
in a denormalized number) on some platforms:
Cygwin 2.9.
@end itemize

Portability problems fixed by Gnulib module @code{strtod-obsolete}:
@itemize
@item
This function is missing on some old platforms.
@end itemize

Portability problems not fixed by Gnulib:
@itemize
@item
This function returns +0.0 (not @minus{}0.0) for negative underflow on some
platforms:
glibc 2.7, Cygwin 1.5.x, mingw, MSVC 14.

@item
This function cannot distinguish between ``nan'' and ``-nan'' on some
platforms:
glibc 2.7, mingw, MSVC 14.

@item
This function fails to correctly parse very long strings on some
platforms:
Mac OS X 10.5, FreeBSD 6.2, NetBSD 5.0, OpenBSD 4.0, Cygwin, mingw, MSVC 14.

@item
This function fails to set @code{errno} upon gradual underflow (resulting
in a denormalized number) on some platforms:
MSVC 14.

@item
The replacement function does not always return correctly rounded results.

@item
If no conversion could be performed, this function sets @code{errno}
to @code{EINVAL} on some platforms.  Portable programs should check
for no conversion by comparing @code{str} to @code{*endptr}, not by
inspecting @code{errno}.
@end itemize
