@node swprintf
@subsection @code{swprintf}
@findex swprintf

POSIX specification:@* @url{https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/functions/swprintf.html}

Gnulib module: ---

Portability problems fixed by Gnulib:
@itemize
@end itemize

Portability problems not fixed by Gnulib:
@itemize
@item
This function is missing on some platforms:
NetBSD 3.0, OpenBSD 3.8, Minix 3.1.8, HP-UX 11.00, Cygwin 1.5.x, mingw with UCRT.
@item
This function has a different signature on some platforms:
MSVC 9.
@item
This function is only defined as a macro on some platforms:
MSVC 14.
@item
This function does not support the @samp{n} directive on some platforms:
glibc when used with @code{_FORTIFY_SOURCE >= 2} (set by default on Ubuntu),
macOS 14, OpenBSD, MSVC 14, Android.
@item
This function sometimes returns a wrong value through the @samp{n} directive
on some platforms:
@c https://www.openwall.com/lists/musl/2023/03/19/1
musl libc 1.2.3.
@item
On Windows and 32-bit AIX platforms, @code{wchar_t} is a 16-bit type and therefore cannot
accommodate all Unicode characters.
@item
On Windows, this function does not take a buffer size as second argument.
@item
This function produces wrong values for the @samp{La} directive
on some platforms:
@c https://sourceware.org/PR13726
glibc 2.15,
@c https://dev.haiku-os.org/ticket/18353
Haiku,
NetBSD 10.0.
@item
This function does not support size specifiers as in C23 (@code{w8},
@code{w16}, @code{w32}, @code{w64}, @code{wf8}, @code{wf16}, @code{wf32},
@code{wf64}) on some platforms:
glibc 2.37, musl libc, macOS 14, FreeBSD 13.2, NetBSD 10.0, OpenBSD 7.5, AIX 7.3, Solaris 11.4, Cygwin 3.5.3, mingw, MSVC, Android 9.0.
@item
This function ignores the minimum field width in the @samp{lc} directive
on some platforms:
@c https://www.openwall.com/lists/musl/2023/03/20/1
musl libc 1.2.3.
@item
This function is broken when it produces output that contains null wide
characters on some platforms:
@c https://www.openwall.com/lists/musl/2023/03/22/9
musl libc 1.2.3,
macOS 14, FreeBSD 13.1, NetBSD 10.0, OpenBSD 7.2, AIX 7.2, mingw.
@item
This function doesn't support the @code{'} flag at all on some platforms:
mingw without @code{__USE_MINGW_ANSI_STDIO}, MSVC 14,
@c https://dev.haiku-os.org/ticket/19522
Haiku.
@item
This function doesn't support the @code{'} flag correctly for integers
(it uses the decimal point instead of the thousands separator!)
on some platforms:
mingw with @code{__USE_MINGW_ANSI_STDIO}.
@item
This function doesn't support the @code{'} flag together with a precision
on an integer argument correctly on some platforms:
glibc 2.36, FreeBSD 14.0, NetBSD 10.0, Solaris 11, Cygwin 3.6.0, Haiku.
@item
This function doesn't support the @code{'} flag correctly in locales where
the thousands separator is a multibyte character on some platforms:
NetBSD 10.0, Solaris 11 OpenIndiana.
@item
This function does not support the @samp{b} directive, required by ISO C23,
on some platforms:
glibc 2.34, musl libc, macOS 14, FreeBSD 13.2, NetBSD 10.0, OpenBSD 7.5,
AIX 7.3, HP-UX 11, Solaris 11.4, Cygwin 3.5.3, mingw, MSVC 14, Android 9.0.
@item
This function does not support the @samp{B} directive on some platforms:
glibc 2.34, musl libc, macOS 14, FreeBSD 13.2, NetBSD 10.0, OpenBSD 7.5, AIX 7.3, Solaris 11.4, Cygwin 3.5.3, mingw, MSVC, Android 9.0.
@item
printf @code{"%#.0x"} or @code{"%#.0X"} with a zero argument yields an
incorrect result (non-empty) on some platforms:
Mac OS X 10.6.
@item
The @code{%m} directive is not portable, use @code{%s} mapped to an
argument of @code{strerror(errno)} (or a version of @code{strerror_r})
instead.
@item
In the C or POSIX locales, the @code{%c} and @code{%s} conversions may fail
on some platforms:
glibc 2.35, musl libc 1.2.4, FreeBSD 13.2, NetBSD 10.0, OpenBSD 7.2, Cygwin 2.9.0.
@item
The @code{%lc} directive may fail on some platforms:
musl libc 1.2.4, FreeBSD 13.2, NetBSD 10.0, OpenBSD 7.2.
@item
When formatting an integer with grouping flag, this function inserts thousands
separators even in the "C" locale on some platforms:
NetBSD 5.1.
@end itemize
