@node vasprintf
@subsection @code{vasprintf}
@findex vasprintf

Gnulib module: vasprintf or vasprintf-posix

Portability problems fixed by either Gnulib module @code{vasprintf} or @code{vasprintf-posix}:
@itemize
@item
This function is missing on some platforms:
AIX 5.1, HP-UX 11, IRIX 6.5, OSF/1 5.1, Solaris 10, mingw, MSVC 9, Interix 3.5.
@end itemize

Portability problems fixed by Gnulib module @code{vasprintf-posix}:
@itemize
@item
This function does not support size specifiers as in C99 (@code{hh}, @code{ll},
@code{j}, @code{t}, @code{z}) on some platforms:
Cygwin 1.5.24, BeOS.
@item
printf of @samp{long double} numbers is unsupported on some platforms:
BeOS.
@item
printf @code{"%f"}, @code{"%e"}, @code{"%g"} of Infinity and NaN yields an
incorrect result on some platforms:
Solaris 11 2011-11.
@item
This function does not support the @samp{a} and @samp{A} directives on some
platforms:
glibc-2.3.6, Mac OS X 10.5, NetBSD 5.0, OpenBSD 4.0, Solaris 11 2011-11, Cygwin 1.5.x, BeOS.
@item
This function does not support the @samp{F} directive on some platforms:
NetBSD 3.0, Cygwin 1.5.x, BeOS.
@item
This function does not support the @samp{ls} directive on some platforms:
OpenBSD 4.0, Cygwin 1.5.x, Haiku.
@item
This function does not support precisions in the @samp{ls} directive correctly
on some platforms:
Solaris 11 2011-11.
@item
This function does not support format directives that access arguments in an
arbitrary order, such as @code{"%2$s"}, on some platforms:
NetBSD 3.0, BeOS.
@item
This function doesn't support the @code{'} flag on some platforms:
NetBSD 3.0, Cygwin 1.5.24.
@item
printf @code{"%010f"} of NaN and Infinity yields an incorrect result (padded
with zeroes) on some platforms:
Mac OS X 10.5, FreeBSD 6.0, NetBSD 5.0, Solaris 11 2011-11, Cygwin 1.5.x.
@item
This function does not support precisions larger than 512 or 1024 in integer,
floating-point and pointer output on some platforms:
BeOS.
@item
This function can crash in out-of-memory conditions on some platforms:
Mac OS X 10.3, FreeBSD 6.0, NetBSD 5.0.
@end itemize

Portability problems not fixed by Gnulib:
@itemize
@end itemize
